VOLUME

DISEASE CONTROL PRIORITIES • THIRD EDITION

Cancer

3

DISEASE CONTROL PRIORITIES • THIRD EDITION
Series Editors
Dean T. Jamison
Rachel Nugent
Hellen Gelband
Susan Horton
Prabhat Jha
Ramanan Laxminarayan
Volumes in the Series
Essential Surgery
Reproductive, Maternal, Newborn, and Child Health
Cancer
Mental, Neurological, and Substance Use Disorders
Cardiovascular, Respiratory, Renal, and Endocrine Disorders
HIV/AIDS, STIs, Tuberculosis, and Malaria
Injury Prevention and Environmental Health
Child and Adolescent Development
Disease Control Priorities: Improving Health and Reducing Poverty

DISEASE CONTROL PRIORITIES
Budgets constrain choices. Policy analysis helps decision makers achieve the greatest value
from limited available resources. In 1993, the World Bank published Disease Control Priorities
in Developing Countries (DCP1), an attempt to systematically assess the cost-effectiveness
(value for money) of interventions that would address the major sources of disease burden
in low- and middle-income countries. The World Bank’s 1993 World Development Report
on health drew heavily on DCP1’s findings to conclude that specific interventions against
noncommunicable diseases were cost-effective, even in environments in which substantial
burdens of infection and undernutrition persisted.
DCP2, published in 2006, updated and extended DCP1 in several aspects, including explicit
consideration of the implications for health systems of expanded intervention coverage. One
way that health systems expand intervention coverage is through selected platforms that
deliver interventions that require similar logistics but deliver interventions from different
packages of conceptually related interventions, for example, against cardiovascular disease.
Platforms often provide a more natural unit for investment than do individual interventions.
Analysis of the costs of packages and platforms—and of the health improvements they
can generate in given epidemiological environments—can help to guide health system
investments and development.
DCP3 differs importantly from DCP1 and DCP2 by extending and consolidating the
concepts of platforms and packages and by offering explicit consideration of the financial
risk protection objective of health systems. In populations lacking access to health insurance
or prepaid care, medical expenses that are high relative to income can be impoverishing.
Where incomes are low, seemingly inexpensive medical procedures can have catastrophic
financial effects. DCP3 offers an approach to explicitly include financial protection as well
as the distribution across income groups of financial and health outcomes resulting from
policies (for example, public finance) to increase intervention uptake. The task in all of the
DCP volumes has been to combine the available science about interventions implemented
in very specific locales and under very specific conditions with informed judgment to reach
reasonable conclusions about the impact of intervention mixes in diverse environments.
DCP3 ’s broad aim is to delineate essential intervention packages and their related delivery
platforms to assist decision makers in allocating often tightly constrained budgets so that
health system objectives are maximally achieved.
DCP3 ’s nine volumes are being published in 2015 and 2016 in an environment in which
serious discussion continues about quantifying the sustainable development goal (SDG) for
health. DCP3 ’s analyses are well-placed to assist in choosing the means to attain the health
SDG and assessing the related costs. Only when these volumes, and the analytic efforts on
which they are based, are completed will we be able to explore SDG-related and other broad
policy conclusions and generalizations. The final DCP3 volume will report those conclusions.
Each individual volume will provide valuable, specific policy analyses on the full range of
interventions, packages, and policies relevant to its health topic.
More than 500 individuals and multiple institutions have contributed to DCP3. We convey
our acknowledgments elsewhere in this volume. Here we express our particular gratitude to

the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation for its sustained financial support, to the InterAcademy
Medical Panel (and its U.S. affiliate, the Institute of Medicine of the National Academy of
Sciences), and to the External and Corporate Relations Publishing and Knowledge division
of the World Bank. Each played a critical role in this effort.
Dean T. Jamison
Rachel Nugent
Hellen Gelband
Susan Horton
Prabhat Jha
Ramanan Laxminarayan

VOLUME

DISEASE CONTROL PRIORITIES • THIRD EDITION

Cancer
EDITORS

Hellen Gelband
Prabhat Jha
Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan
Susan Horton

3

© 2015 International Bank for Reconstruction and Development / The World Bank
1818 H Street NW, Washington, DC 20433
Telephone: 202-473-1000; Internet: www.worldbank.org
Some rights reserved
1 2 3 4 18 17 16 15
This work is a product of the staff of The World Bank with external contributions. The findings, interpretations, and
conclusions expressed in this work do not necessarily reflect the views of The World Bank, its Board of Executive Directors,
or the governments they represent. The World Bank does not guarantee the accuracy of the data included in this work. The
boundaries, colors, denominations, and other information shown on any map in this work do not imply any judgment on the
part of The World Bank concerning the legal status of any territory or the endorsement or acceptance of such boundaries.
Nothing herein shall constitute or be considered to be a limitation upon or waiver of the privileges and immunities of The World
Bank, all of which are specifically reserved.
Rights and Permissions
This work is available under the Creative Commons Attribution 3.0 IGO license (CC BY 3.0 IGO) http://creativecommons.org
/licenses/by/3.0/igo. Under the Creative Commons Attribution license, you are free to copy, distribute, transmit, and adapt this
work, including for commercial purposes, under the following conditions:
Attribution—Please cite the work as follows: Gelband, H., P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton, editors. 2015. Cancer.
Disease Control Priorities, third edition, volume 3. Washington, DC: World Bank. doi:10.1596/978-1-4648-0349-9. License:
Creative Commons Attribution CC BY 3.0 IGO
Translations—If you create a translation of this work, please add the following disclaimer along with the attribution: This
translation was not created by The World Bank and should not be considered an official World Bank translation. The World
Bank shall not be liable for any content or error in this translation.
Adaptations—If you create an adaptation of this work, please add the following disclaimer along with the attribution:
This is an adaptation of an original work by The World Bank. Views and opinions expressed in the adaptation are the sole
responsibility of the author or authors of the adaptation and are not endorsed by The World Bank.
Third-party content—The World Bank does not necessarily own each component of the content contained within the work.
The World Bank therefore does not warrant that the use of any third-party-owned individual component or part contained in
the work will not infringe on the rights of those third parties. The risk of claims resulting from such infringement rests solely
with you. If you wish to re-use a component of the work, it is your responsibility to determine whether permission is needed
for that re-use and to obtain permission from the copyright owner. Examples of components can include, but are not limited
to, tables, figures, or images.
All queries on rights and licenses should be addressed to the Publishing and Knowledge Division, The World Bank, 1818 H
Street NW, Washington, DC 20433, USA; fax: 202-522-2625; e-mail: pubrights@worldbank.org.
Softcover

Hardcover

ISBN (paper): 978-1-4648-0349-9
ISBN (electronic): 978-1-4648-0369-7
DOI: 10.1596/978-1-4648-0349-9

ISBN: 978-1-4648-0350-5
DOI: 10.1596/978-1-4648-0350-5

Cover photo: © IAEA Imagebank/Dana Sacchetti/IAEA. Used with permission; further permission required for reuse.
Cover and interior design: Debra Naylor, Naylor Design, Washington, DC
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Cancer (Gelband)
Cancer / editors, Hellen Gelband, Prabhat Jha, Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan, Susan Horton.
p. ; cm. — (Disease control priorities ; volume 3)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 978-1-4648-0349-9 (alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-4648-0350-5 (alk. paper) — ISBN 978-1-4648-0369-7 (electronics)
I. Gelband, Hellen, editor. II. Jha, Prabhat, 1965- , editor. III. Sankaranarayanan, R. (Rengaswamy), 1952- , editor. IV. Horton,
Susan, editor. V. World Bank, issuing body. VI. Title. VII. Series: Disease control priorities ; v. 3
[DNLM: 1. Neoplasms—economics. 2. Neoplasms—prevention & control. 3. Cost of Illness. 4. Developing Countries.
5. Health Services Research—economics. WA 395]
RC262
362.19699’400681—dc23

2015019371

Contents

Foreword
xi
Preface
xiii
Abbreviations
1. Summary

xv
1

Hellen Gelband, Prabhat Jha, Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan, Cindy L. Gauvreau, and Susan Horton

PART 1

BURDEN

2. The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and
Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control
23
Freddie Bray and Isabelle Soerjomataram

PART 2

INTERVENTIONS

3. Breast Cancer

45

Benjamin O. Anderson, Joseph Lipscomb, Raul H. Murillo, and David B. Thomas

4. Cervical Cancer

69

Lynette Denny, Rolando Herrero, Carol Levin, and Jane J. Kim

5. Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

85

Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan, Kunnambath Ramadas, Hemantha Amarasinghe, Sujha Subramanian,
and Newell Johnson

6. Colorectal Cancer

101

Linda Rabeneck, Susan Horton, Ann G. Zauber, and Craig Earle

7. Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

121

Sumit Gupta, Scott C. Howard, Stephen P. Hunger, Federico G. Antillon, Monika L. Metzger, Trijn Israels,
Mhamed Harif, and Carlos Rodriguez-Galindo

8. Liver Cancer

147

Hellen Gelband, Chien-Jen Chen, Wendong Chen, Silvia Franceschi, Sir Andrew Hall, W. Thomas London,
Katherine A. McGlynn, and Christopher P. Wild

ix

9. Cancer Pain Relief

165

James Cleary, Hellen Gelband, and Judith Wagner

PART 3

POLICY, CANCER SERVICES, AND RESEARCH

10. Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and
Tobacco Taxes
175
Prabhat Jha, Mary MacLennan, Frank. J. Chaloupka, Ayda Yurekli, Chintanie Ramasundarahettige,
Krishna Palipudi, Witold Zatońksi, Samira Asma, and Prakash C. Gupta

11. Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

195

Mary Gospodarowicz, Joann Trypuc, Anil D'Cruz, Jamal Khader, Sherif Omar, and Felicia Knaul

12. Screening for Cancer: Considerations for Low- and Middle-Income Countries

211

Terrence Sullivan, Richard Sullivan, and Ophira M. Ginsburg

13. Surgical Services for Cancer Care

223

Anna J. Dare, Benjamin O. Anderson, Richard Sullivan, C. S. Pramesh, Cheng-Har Yip, Andre Ilbawi,
Isaac F. Adewole, Rajendra A. Badwe, and Cindy L. Gauvreau

14. Radiation Therapy for Cancer

239

David A. Jaffray and Mary K. Gospodarowicz

15. Need for National Commitments to Cancer Research to Guide Public
Health Investment and Practice
249
Edward L. Trimble, Preetha Rajaraman, Ann Chao, Thomas Gross, Carol Levin, You-Lin Qiao,
Timothy Rebbeck, Lisa Stevens, and Fang-hui Zhao

PART 4

ECONOMICS

16. Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

263

Susan Horton and Cindy L. Gauvreau

17. Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings

281

Felicia Knaul, Susan Horton, Pooja Yerramilli, Hellen Gelband, and Rifat Atun

18. An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to
Prevent Cervical Cancer in China
295
Carol Levin, Monisha Sharma, Zachary Olson, Stéphane Verguet, Ju-Fang Shi, Shao-Ming Wang,
You-Lin Qiao, Dean T. Jamison, and Jane J. Kim

DCP3 Series Acknowledgments
307
Volume and Series Editors
309
Contributors
311
Advisory Committee to the Editors
315
Reviewers
317
Index
319

x

Contents

Foreword

When the biopsy results confirmed that I had oral
cancer, I was 18 years old. If it sounded like a death sentence, there was reason for that thought. Survival rates
from cancer were very low in those days, especially in
the poorer countries in the world (I was then a student
in Calcutta), and statistics offered very little reason for
cheer. Now, at the age of 81, I can not only celebrate the
fact that I made it, with help from heavy-dose radiation,
but also that the battle against cancer in the world is
increasingly being won.
However, the victory is not only partial, it is also
deeply uneven. With early diagnosis and effective treatment, almost two-thirds of the people who get cancer
in high-income countries now survive. In low- and
middle-income countries, only half of that proportion—no more than one-third—make it.
This wonderfully illuminating book tells us about
the state of the battle against cancer, but it also takes
on the challenge of making lives better—and longer—
particularly in the poorer countries of the world. As the
chapters in this state-of-the-art book on cancer show,

with extensive data and probing analyses, both mortality and suffering from cancer can be dramatically
reduced, even in the less affluent countries, through a
combination of preventive measures (of which tobacco
control is the most well-known and frustratingly
underused avenue), early diagnosis (distressingly low
for cancers in which early detection is not difficult to
achieve and would make a major difference, such as
oral, cervical, and breast cancer as well as the cancers
that afflict children), and of course early treatment
(including well-established procedures as well as newly
developed methods).
The lesson that emerges from the well-aimed empirical
analyses presented in this volume is not only that a major
difference can be made in the incidence, management,
and elimination of cancer, even in the poorer countries
of the world, but that this can be done in cost-effective
and affordable ways. Understanding and determination
are the deficiencies most in need of change.
This is, ultimately, a cheerful book on a very grim
subject. It is also a hugely important invitation to action.
Amartya Sen
Thomas W. Lamont University Professor
Harvard University
Cambridge, Massachusetts
Nobel Laureate, Economic Sciences 1998

xi

Preface

The burden of cancer in low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs) is large and growing. By contrast,
resources to control cancer in LMICs, either from
domestic budgets or international aid, have not increased
proportionately. Most populations in LMICs lack access
to effective cancer prevention, treatment, and palliation.
This volume, Cancer, part of the 3rd edition of Disease
Control Priorities, provides an up-to-date review of
the effectiveness, cost-effectiveness, cost, and feasibility
of interventions for cancers that impose high disease
burdens in LMICs.
We propose an “essential package” of feasible interventions that countries can use in cancer planning,
knowing that some countries are well along in providing
many of the elements. We recognize that the essential
cancer package may not be immediately feasible in
low-income countries and only partially so in many
middle-income countries. The package is not intended
to limit cancer control to these measures, but we are
suggesting that these measures are likely to save large
numbers of lives at an affordable cost and should be prioritized by the public sector before large investments are
made in interventions that will have more limited effects.
Local cancer patterns and resource availability may dictate somewhat different priorities, and these should also
guide national cancer planning.
Smoking cessation reduces the risks of developing
various cancers reasonably quickly, but other preventive measures, such as vaccinations against cervical or
liver cancer, will take longer to manifest full effects.
Many types of cancer, which are not currently preventable, will remain. Thus, the best approach to lowering
the cancer burden is a system that promotes prevention
as well as early detection and treatment. This volume
provides evidence that policy makers at all levels can
use to support the immediate ramp-up of cancer

control interventions that will have near-term and
long-range benefits.
Serious progress in cancer prevention and treatment
began about half a century ago in high-income countries.
The knowledge that has fueled progress is available immediately for LMICs. In some cases, newer and better technologies are now available: HPV testing can replace the
more resource- and infrastructure-intensive Pap smear
for cervical cancer screening. Newer screening tests for
colon cancer have similar advantages. Increasing national
incomes and broader national health coverage in middleincome countries, in particular, have already made a range
of services available to a wider swath of the population.
The pace needs to be accelerated and efforts can be broadened in low-income countries, where numbers of deaths
from cancer are still relatively low, but increasing.
Regarding tobacco—still the single most important
cancer-causing agent the world over—LMICs have the
knowledge to avert the epidemic that has now begun
to subside in high-income countries. At the same
time, LMICs are underequipped to combat the tactics
of multinational tobacco companies. In a few cases,
national treasuries profit from state-owned tobacco
companies.
Certain neglected areas are of special concern.
Progress is all but nonexistent in providing adequate
pain control and palliative care, even in middle-income
countries. Limited progress has been made in cancer
registration and cause of death reporting. Very little
progress is evident in documenting the costs and costeffectiveness of interventions in LMICs for even the
highest-burden cancers. And very few clinical trials in
cancer take place in LMICs. As a result, much of the
evidence included in this volume is from high-income
countries, which we and our many co-authors have reinterpreted as realistically as possible for LMICs.

xiii

We thank our dozens of co-authors for working
tirelessly, responding to several reviews, and producing
evidence that can be understood and acted on. We also
give our thanks to the Cancer Surveillance Section of
the International Agency for Research on Cancer for
the custom maps and graphs in the volume and to the
National Cancer Institute, particularly the Center for
Global Health, for supporting the work in many ways.
The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation’s core support
for DCP3, through the University of Washington, has
made the whole enterprise possible. Others in the process also deserve our thanks: the Institute of Medicine
for coordinating critical reviews and the World Bank
publishing staff for their wholehearted collaboration.

Sir George Alleyne, Dr. Christopher Wild, and Sir Richard
Peto acted as special advisors for the volume, providing
guidance and wise counsel.
Cindy Gauvreau coordinated all aspects of the
volume production, including chapter content and
consistency. She vastly improved the quality of the
volume that you see, and we are grateful for her
many contributions. Many more individuals provided
thoughtful comments, guidance, and encouragement;
we thank them all.
The tide has been turned against cancer in highincome countries and can be in the rest of the world,
armed with evidence and bolstered by political resolve.
This volume is intended to spur that effort.
Hellen Gelband
Prabhat Jha
Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan
Susan Horton

xiv

Preface

Abbreviations

ADA
ADR
ALDH
AML
APL
ASIR
BCS
BHGI
BL
BMI
BSE
CBC
CBE
CEA
CI
CIN
CISNET
CME
CMF
CRC
CT
CTC
CVG
DALY
DCIS
ECEA
EDP
EPI
ER
FAC
FAP
FCTC
FIT
FS
Gavi
GDP

American Dental Association
adenoma detection rate
aldehyde dehydrogenase
acute myeloid leukemia
acute promyelocytic leukemia
age-specific incidence rate
breast-conserving surgery
Breast Health Global Initiative
Burkitt lymphoma
body mass index
breast self-examination
complete blood count
clinical breast examination
cost-effectiveness analysis
confidence interval
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia
Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling Network
continuing medical education
cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil
colorectal cancer
computed tomography
computed tomographic colonography
cost per vaccinated girl
disability-adjusted life year
ductal carcinoma in situ
extended cost-effectiveness analysis
early detection and prevention
Expanded Program for Immunization
estrogen receptor
5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin (®Adriamycin), and cyclophosphamide
familial adenomatous polyposis
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
fecal immunochemical test
flexible sigmoidoscopy
Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance
gross domestic product

xv

gFOBT
GICR
GNI
GOPI
GTFRCC
HAU
HBsAg
HBV
HCC
HCV
HDI
HDV
Hib
HICs
HIV
HL
HPV
HR
HSIL
IAEA
IAHPC
IARC
ICD
ICER
ICRCSN
IHC
IMRT
INCB
IT
JCI
LEEP
LICs
LLETZ
LMICs
LR
LYS
MICs
MISCAN
MMG
MRI
MRM
NAFD
NCCN
NCD
NCI
NIAAA
NWTS
OECD
OSMF
PAF
PAHO
PBCR
PET

xvi

Abbreviations

guaiac fecal occult blood test
Global Initiative for Cancer Registry Development
gross national income
Global Opioid Policy Initiative
Global Task Force on Radiotherapy for Cancer Control
Hospice Africa Uganda
hepatitis B surface antigen
hepatitis B virus
hepatocellular carcinoma
hepatitis C virus
Human Development Index
hepatitis D virus
Haemophilus influenzae type B
high-income countries
human immunodeficiency virus
Hodgkin lymphoma
human papillomavirus
high-risk
high grade squamous intraepithelial lesion
International Atomic Energy Agency
International Association for Hospice and Palliative Care
International Agency for Research on Cancer
International Classification of Diseases
incremental cost-effectiveness ratio
International Colorectal Cancer Screening Network
immunohistochemistry
intensity modulated radiation therapy
International Narcotics Control Board
information technology
Joint Commission International
loop electrosurgical excision procedure
low-income countries
large loop excision of the transformation zone
low- and middle-income countries
low-risk
life-years saved
middle-income countries
microsimulation screening analysis
mammography
magnetic resonance imaging
modified radical mastectomy
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease
National Comprehensive Cancer Network
noncommunicable disease
National Cancer Institute
National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
National Wilms Tumor Study
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development
oral submucous fibrosis
population attributable fraction
Pan American Health Organization
population-based cancer registry
positron emission tomography

PODC
PPP
PSA
QALY
RCC
RCT
RT
SEER
SES
SIL
SLN
SPS
SSP
TLS
TNM
TRM
UCI
UHC
UICC
UMIC
UNOP
US
USMSTF
USPSTF
VAD
VIA
VIAM
VLP
VSL
WBC
WHO
WTO
YLL

Pediatric Oncology in Developing Countries
purchasing power parity
prostate-specific antigen
quality-adjusted life-year
regional cancer center
randomized controlled trial
radiotherapy
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results
socioeconomic status
squamous intraepithelial lesion
sentinel lymph node
Seguro Popular de Salud
sessile serrated polyp
tumor lysis syndrome
tumor, nodes, metastasis
treatment-related mortality
Uganda Cancer Institute
universal health coverage
Union for International Cancer Control
upper-middle-income country
Unidad Nacional de Oncologia Pediátrica
ultrasound
U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on Colorectal Cancer/American Cancer Society
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
vascular access device
visual inspection with acetic acid
magnified visual inspection with acetic acid
virus-like particles
value of statistical life
white blood cell
World Health Organization
World Trade Organization
years of life lost

Abbreviations

xvii

Chapter

1

Summary
Hellen Gelband, Prabhat Jha, Rengaswamy
Sankaranarayanan, Cindy L. Gauvreau, and Susan Horton

INTRODUCTION
At the 2012 World Health Assembly, member states agreed
to a goal of reducing rates of premature death from noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) by 25 percent by 2025,
starting from a 2008 baseline (WHO 2011a, 2011b). The
United Nations (UN) Sustainable Development Goals for
2030, announced in September 2015, will include reducing
premature death from NCDs, of which cancer is a substantial part (map 1.1).
This chapter summarizes the analyses and conclusions of the 79 authors of this volume on cancer, Disease
Control Priorities, 3rd edition (DCP3 Cancer), and analyzes interventions for effectiveness, cost-effectiveness,
affordability, and feasibility in low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs; see box 1.1 for key messages). The
intent is to help governments of LMICs commit to
locally appropriate national cancer control strategies
that will include a range of cost-effective interventions,
customized to local epidemiological patterns and available funding, and to convey this commitment widely
to their populations. Where affordable treatment can
be provided, conveying this to the public can motivate
people to seek treatment when their cancer is at an earlier, much more curable stage. Providing a package of
services that addresses a large part of the cancer burden
will go a long way toward helping countries reach the
new NCD goals. DCP3 Cancer is one of nine planned
volumes in the DCP3 series (box 1.2).

The DCP3 package includes prevention strategies, but
many cancers cannot be prevented to any great extent
by available methods. Some can be treated effectively
(breast and childhood cancers, for example), however,
and the availability of effective treatment bolsters public
confidence in the overall program (Brown and others
2006; Knaul and others 2011; Sloan and Gelband 2007).
Cancer control programs can mobilize broad political
support, as happened in Mexico with the addition of
breast cancer and childhood cancer treatment into
expanded national health insurance coverage (Knaul
and others 2012).
In high-income countries (HICs), most who
develop cancer survive, although survival depends
strongly on the type of cancer (table 1.1). In LMICs,
less than one-third survive, and in some the proportion is much smaller (Ferlay and others 2015). The
differences in survival are due partly to differences in
the patterns of cancer incidence; some types of cancer that are common in many LMICs, such as lung,
esophagus, stomach, and liver cancers, have a poor
prognosis even in HICs (Bray and Soerjomataram
2015, chapter 2 in this volume). The other major contributor to poor outcomes is that many fewer people
come for treatment when their cancer is at an early,
curable stage than in HICs (Allemani and others 2015;
Ferlay and others 2015).
The aim of DCP3 is to identify cost-effective, feasible,
and affordable interventions that address significant

Corresponding authors: Hellen Gelband, Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy, Gelband@cddep.org; and Prabhat Jha, Centre for Global Health
Research, St. Michael’s Hospital and Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto, Prabhat.Jha@utoronto.ca.

1

MAP 1.1 Cancer Mortality Before Age 70 Years, by World Bank Income Groupings, 2012

High-income
Cancer deaths (thousand):
Mainly tobacco-related 300
Mainly infection-related 130
Other 570
Total 1,000

Upper-middle-income
Cancer deaths (thousand):
Mainly tobacco-related 560
Mainly infection-related 540
Other 810
Total 1,910

Source: Based on WHO Global Health Estimates (WHO 2012)

2

Cancer

IBRD 41651 | MAY 2015

Lower-middle-income
Cancer deaths (thousand):
Mainly tobacco-related 260
Mainly infection-related 260
Other 650
Total 1,170

Low-income
Cancer deaths (thousand):
Mainly tobacco-related 70
Mainly infection-related 90
Other 190
Total 350

Summary

3

Box 1.1

Key Messages
Cancer is already a major cause of death in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs), particularly in
middle-income countries, and will increase as a percentage of deaths in all LMICs, driven by population
aging and faster declines in other causes of death.
In most populations, helping current tobacco
users to quit and young people not to start smoking
are the most urgent priorities in cancer prevention
(and in the control of other noncommunicable
diseases), along with vaccination against hepatitis
B and the human papillomavirus (HPV). Higher
tobacco taxes and accompanying interventions will
reduce cancer incidence and generate substantial
extra revenues for governments.
Other than tobacco- and virus-related cancers,
however, most of the increase in cancer incidence is
not currently preventable, but many cases of cancer
can be effectively treated. Early breast cancer and
cervical cancer are common, and often curable; precancerous cervical lesions are even more curable.
Childhood cancers are relatively rare, but some
are highly curable. The interventions supported by
the analyses in this Disease Control Priorities, 3rd
edition (DCP3 Cancer) go beyond current World

disease burdens in LMICs (box 1.3). Accordingly, we
have examined the following:
1. The avoidable burden of premature death (defined as
before age 70, which approximates current global life
expectancy) from cancer in LMICs (table 1.1)
2. The main effective interventions for the prevention,
early detection, treatment, and palliation of cancer,
and their cost-effectiveness
3. The costs and feasibility of developing health
system infrastructure that could deliver progressively wider coverage of a set of cost-effective cancer
services.
Using these inputs, we define an “essential package”
of cost-effective interventions for cancer and discuss

4

Cancer

Health Organization best buys, which are limited
to interventions that are deliverable in primary care
settings.
The DCP3 essential package of cost-effective and
feasible interventions would, if fully implemented,
cost an additional $20 billion per year, or 3 percent
of total public spending on health in LMICs; 2.6 percent in upper-middle-income countries (UMICs);
and 5 percent in lower-middle-income countries;
but 13 percent in low-income countries (LICs). In
per capita terms, this would cost $5.70, $1.70, and
$1.70 annually in UMICs, lower-middle-income,
and LICs, respectively. Such increases are potentially
feasible in all but the LICs, which would require
external support.
Cancer services that are considered appropriate
for a national cancer strategy should be covered
through universal health coverage as soon as countries are able to do so.
Global initiatives for cancer control in LMICs
are needed to lower the costs of key inputs for the
essential package, including large-scale commodity
purchases; to expand technical assistance; and to
promote cancer research.

their affordability and feasibility, which differ markedly between low-, lower-middle-, and upper-middleincome countries. Even within the same income
categories, countries may differ widely in epidemiological patterns and health systems, resulting in different country-specific essential packages. Hence, this
is not intended to lead to a common cancer plan for
all LMICs, but to identify elements that will be appropriate in many countries and spur discussion within
countries about rational cancer control planning and
implementation. The result would be national cancer
plans that are tailored to local conditions but retain
the characteristics of effectiveness, cost-effectiveness,
feasibility, and affordability. Finally, we review some
ways in which global initiatives could help LMICs to
expand cancer control.

Box 1.2

From the Series Editors of Disease Control Priorities, 3rd Edition
Budgets constrain choices. Policy analysis helps
decision makers achieve the greatest value from
limited available resources. In 1993, the World Bank
published Disease Control Priorities in Developing
Countries (DCP1), an attempt to assess systematically the cost-effectiveness (value for money) of
interventions that would address the major sources
of disease burden in low- and middle-income countries [Jamison and others 1993]). The World Bank’s
1993 World Development Report on health drew
heavily on the findings in DCP1 to conclude that
specific interventions against noncommunicable
diseases were cost-effective, even in environments in
which substantial burdens of infection and undernutrition persisted.
DCP2, published in 2006, updated and extended
DCP1 in several respects, including explicit consideration of the implications for health systems
of expanded intervention coverage (Jamison and
others 2006). One way that health systems expand
intervention coverage is through selected platforms
that deliver interventions that require similar logistics but address heterogeneous health problems.
Platforms often provide a more natural unit for
investment than do individual interventions, and
conventional health economics has offered little
understanding of how to make choices across platforms. Analysis of the costs of packages and platforms—and of the health improvements they can
generate in given epidemiological environments—
can help guide health system investments and
development.
DCP3 differs substantively from DCP1 and
DCP2 by extending and consolidating the concepts of platforms and packages and by offering
explicit consideration of the financial risk protection
objective of health systems. In populations lacking
access to health insurance or prepaid care, medical
expenses that are high relative to income can be
impoverishing. Where incomes are low, seemingly

inexpensive medical procedures can have catastrophic financial effects. DCP3 offers an approach
that explicitly includes financial protection as well as
the distribution across income groups of the financial and health outcomes resulting from policies (for
example, public finance) to increase intervention
uptake (Verguet, Laxminarayan, and Jamison 2015).
The task in all the volumes has been to combine the
available science about interventions implemented
in very specific locales and under very specific conditions with informed judgment to reach reasonable
conclusions about the impacts of intervention mixes
in diverse environments. The broad aim of DCP3 is
to offer, for consideration and adaptation, essential
intervention packages—such as the essential cancer
package in this volume—and their related delivery
platforms. This information will assist decision
makers in allocating budgets so that health system
objectives are maximally achieved.
The nine volumes of DCP3 are being published
in 2015 and 2016 in an environment in which
serious discussion continues about quantifying the
sustainable development goal (SDG) for health (UN
2015). The analyses in DCP3 are well-placed to assist
in choosing the means to attain the health SDG and
assessing the related costs. The final volume will
explore SDG-related and other broad policy conclusions and generalizations, based on the analytic
findings from the full set of volumes. Each individual volume will provide valuable, specific policy
analyses on the full range of interventions, packages,
and policies relevant to its health topic.
Dean T. Jamison
Rachel Nugent
Hellen Gelband
Susan Horton
Prabhat Jha
Ramanan Laxminarayan

Summary

5

Table 1.1 Worldwide Cancer Deaths in 2012 at Ages 0–69 by Cancer Site and Country Income Grouping, and 5-Year Survival
Rates in Low-, Middle-, and High-Income Countries
Annual Deaths, age 0–69 years (thousands) by World Bank country
income group

5-year survival (%),
cancer registry data

Low
income
0.8

Lowermiddle
income
2.4

Uppermiddle
income
2.3

High
income
1.2

World
(total)
6.7

Low or
middle
income
5.5

High
income
1.2

Lung, mouth, and esophagus

70

260

560

300

1,200

10

20

Liver

30

90

270

60

440

10

20

Breast

30

140

110

80

360

75

90

Stomach

20

80

210

50

360

20

40

Colon or rectum

20

80

120

100

310

50

60

Cervix

40

90

60

20

200

55

65

Ovary

8

30

30

30

100

25

40

Leukemia, age 0–14 years

3

10

10

2

30

65

90

age 15–69 years

10

40

60

30

140

30

50

4

10

20

20

60

70

90

110

330

470

310

1,220

—

—

Population in billions
Cause of cancer and other deaths
Cancer, by site (ICD-10 C00-99)

Prostate
Other/unknown site
All cancers (% of all causes)

350 (6%)

1,170 (6%)

1,920 (22%)

1,000 (37%)

4,400 (14%)

—

—

All noncommunicable diseases

1,660

6,300

5,950

2,200

16,070

—

—

Communicable/external causes

4,100

7,380

2,650

500

14,660

—

—

All causes

5,760

13,680

8,600

2,700

30,730

—

—

Sources: Population and mortality based on data from the UN Population Division (UNPD 2012) and WHO Global Health Estimates (WHO 2012). Estimated 5-year survival based on Allemani and
others 2015.
Note: Number of deaths above 10,000 are rounded to the nearest 10,000, so totals may differ. Estimated five-year survival rounded to the nearest 5 percent. — = Not applicable.

EVOLVING CANCER BURDEN
The WHO’s International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) estimates that in 2012 there were 14 million new
cases of cancer and 8 million deaths from cancer, more
than half of them in people younger than age 70 years
(table 1.1) (Ferlay and others 2015). Of the 4.4 million
cancer deaths before age 70, 3.4 million were in LMICs;
1.9 million in UMICs, 1.2 million in lower-middle-income countries, and 0.3 million in LICs. Two-thirds of
the cancer deaths before age 70 years in LMICs were cancers of the lung, mouth, or esophagus (0.9 million, many
caused by tobacco), liver (0.4 million, many caused by
vaccine-preventable hepatitis B infection), stomach (0.3
million), breast (0.3 million), cervix (0.2 million, many
caused by human papillomavirus [HPV] infection), and
colon or rectum (0.2 million) (See table 1.1, figure 1.1;

6

Cancer

and Bray and Soerjomataram 2015; Ferlay and others
2015; WHO 2012).
Worldwide, cancer death rates are slowly decreasing
(table 1.2). Between 2000 and 2010, age-standardized
cancer death rates before age 70 years fell by about
1 percent per year, bolstered by worldwide declines in
cervical cancer and stomach cancer, for reasons that are
not fully understood. Male lung cancer rates decreased
in some countries, but in lower-middle-income countries, the death rates from tobacco-associated cancers
rose slightly.
Absolute numbers of cancer deaths and cancer as a
proportion of all deaths will continue to rise because
of three factors: world population is increasing, particularly in later middle age and old age; mortality
from diseases other than cancer is decreasing; and
in some major populations the effects of tobacco are

Box 1.3

Methods
The 79 authors of the 18 chapters in this volume
surveyed the published and gray literature to identify
cost-effective interventions for the cancers studied.
Cancer-specific incidence and mortality data are from
the International Agency for Research on Cancer’s
GLOBOCAN (Ferlay and others 2015). Mortality
data are from the World Health Organization’s Global
Health Estimates (WHO 2012), and demographic
estimates are from the United Nations (UNPD 2012).
The analyses were stratified by World Bank
country group classifications as defined by 2013
per capita gross national income: 34 low-income
countries (less than US$1,045), 50 lower-middleincome countries (US$1,046 to US$4,125), and
55 upper-middle-income countries (US$4,126 to
US$12,745) (World Bank 2014a).
Cost-effectiveness estimates were compiled for
each cancer and each intervention. Systematic searches
were conducted in PubMed for all interventions
covered in the volume, for studies in or including
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), published in 2003–13 (Horton and Gauvreau 2015). For
colorectal cancer, studies from high-income Asian

increasing (Jha 2009). Based on population growth
alone (at 2010 death rates age-standardized to the
expected 2030 population), more than 6 million cancer deaths are expected in 2030 in people younger
than age 70 years, and an equal number in people
age 70 years and older (table 1.3). Three-quarters of
these future cancer deaths are expected to occur in
middle-income countries (MICs).

IMPACT ON HOUSEHOLDS
Counter to common perceptions, cancer death rates
are often higher in lower-income groups than highincome groups. In India, the age-standardized death
rate from cancer in middle age was twice that in illiterate as in educated populations (Dikshit and others
2012). As are other NCDs, cancer is an important
cause of catastrophic health expenditures that can push
households into poverty (Hamid, Ahsan, and Begum
2014; Hoang Lan and others 2013; Ilbawi, Einterz, and

economies were also sought. A recent review of the
cost-effectiveness of cancer interventions for highincome countries (HICs) was also useful (Greenberg
and others 2010). The studies identified used various
outcome measures: life years saved, quality-adjusted
life years (QALYs) gained, and disability-adjusted life
years averted. Evidence from studies in LMICs was
preferred, but rarely available. Evidence from HICs
was considered in all cases, and evidence from highincome Asian economies was particularly important.
We adopted the scale used by the Commission on
Macroeconomics and Health (2001) to define very
cost-effective, cost-effective, and cost-ineffective as
costing < 1, 1–3, and > 3 times per capita income per
QALY (or other measure), respectively. (Commission
on Macroeconomics and Health 2001).
The essential package includes interventions
rated as very cost-effective and cost-effective and
considered potentially affordable and feasible in
resource-constrained environments. Costs are
expressed in 2012 prices. Costs are also expressed as
a percentage of national public spending on health,
estimated by the World Bank (World Bank 2014b).

Nkusu 2013; John and others 2011), because in many
LMICs, cancer surgery, radiotherapy, and chemotherapy are paid for largely out of pocket. In Bangladesh
(Hamid, Ahsan, and Begum 2014) and Cameroon
(Ilbawi, Einterz, and Nkusu 2013), for example, high
user fees increase the likelihood that patients will
not return at all for cancer surgery. Conversely, in
India, some standard types of cancer surgery (for
example, mastectomy) are supposed to be provided
at low, affordable cost in public hospitals; in China,
the national health insurance scheme now offers standard types of cancer surgery at prices most people can
afford. Nevertheless, even in China and India, cancer
can still impose a major financial burden on families,
especially in the lowest income groups, and in the case
of India, cancer services are limited to certain large
cities (Mallath and others 2014). An objective of DCP3
is to evaluate interventions for their distributive effects,
with particular emphasis on the effects on the poor and
on impoverishment at any economic level because of
health care expenses.

Summary

7

Figure 1.1 Incidence and Mortality of Selected Cancers before Age 70
Years, Low- and Middle-Income Countries, 2012

New cases or deaths (000’s)

800

600

400

200

0
Breast

Lung

Liver

Cervix

Stomach

Colonrectum

Cancer site
Incidence

Mortality

Source: Based on IARC GLOBOCAN data (Ferlay and others 2015).

ESSENTIAL PACKAGES OF INTERVENTIONS
The DCP3 essential package of interventions for cancer
is intended to be considered and modified as appropriate
by governments. The specific interventions and the criteria used to choose them (effectiveness, cost-effectiveness,
feasibility, and affordability) are intended to help LMIC
governments decide what to support and what not to
support (Jamison 2015).

For MICs that already have cancer treatment centers
and clinics, the DCP3 approach could be used to help
evaluate additional interventions, now or in the future,
or to re-assess some current activities; in all LMICs it
could help ensure due consideration of how interventions that are considered locally appropriate can achieve
high population coverage.
The WHO has formulated a list of NCD best buys for
LMICs, which were limited to services considered feasible
at the primary care level. Those most relevant to cancer
are three preventive measures: a set of tobacco control
interventions, hepatitis B vaccination to prevent liver
cancer, and some form of screening and treatment for
precancerous cervical lesions (WHO 2011b). The DCP3
Cancer essential package (table 1.4) adds HPV vaccination
(also included by the Commission on Investing in Health
[Jamison and others 2013]) to prevent cervical cancer. The
DCP3 also adds treatment of early-stage cervical cancer
(Denny and others 2015, chapter 4 in this volume); diagnosis and treatment for early breast cancer (Anderson and
others 2015, chapter 3 in this volume); diagnosis and treatment for selected, highly curable childhood cancers (Gupta
and others 2015, chapter 7 in this volume); and palliative
care (Cleary, Gelband, and Wagner 2015, chapter 9 in this
volume), including, at a minimum, opioid drugs for severe
pain control. Treating early stage breast and cervical cancer
includes quality surgery, which could also be available for
many other early-stage resectable cancers. The package
is organized according to delivery platforms, classified as
national level policy, regulation, or community information; primary health clinic or mobile outreach; first-level
hospital; or specialized cancer center.
The cost of the essential package is estimated for the
entire population, not restricted to age under 70 years.
We estimated the global and per capita costs of each
intervention in the package separately for low-income,

Table 1.2 Changes in Deaths from All Causes and Cancer, by Country Income Group, Ages 0–69, 2000–10
(Percent change in mortality rate)
Change in % 2000–10 by World Bank country income group

Low-income

Lowermiddleincome

Upper-middleincome

High-income

World

All cancers

–6

–2

–12

–13

–10

Lung, mouth, esophagus (mainly
tobacco-related)

–6

+1

–11

–12

–9

Cervix, liver, stomach (mainly
infection-related)

–13

–2

–18

–24

–15

Cause of death

All other cancers

–4

–3

–9

–12

–8

All causes

–21

–15

–23

–17

–19

Sources: Based on data from IARC GLOBOCAN (Ferlay and others 2015) and WHO Global Health Estimates (WHO 2012).

8

Cancer

Table 1.3 Projected Deaths from All Causes and Cancer at Ages 0–69 Years, 2030
(at 2010 death rates, thousands)

Population/Cause of death

Lowincome

Lowermiddleincome

Upper-middleincome

Highincome

World

All Causes

8,620

18,110

11,600

2,960

41,290

Cancer

590

1,690

2,690

1,130

6,100

Lung, mouth, esophagus

130

390

820

350

1,690

Cervix, liver, and stomach

80

250

700

120

1,150

All other cancers

380

1,050

1,170

660

3,260

Sources: Based on data from UNPD 2012 and WHO Global Health Estimates (WHO 2012).
Note: All deaths are rounded to nearest 10,000. All cancer deaths (in thousands) at ages 70+ would be 240, 800, 3,110, 2,450, and 6,600 in low-income countries,
lower-middle-income countries, upper-middle-income countries, high-income countries, and worldwide, respectively.

Table 1.4 Essential Cancer Intervention Packagea
Cancer type/
Number of deaths, ages
0–69 years, 2012
(thousands)
All cancers
3,230

Platform for intervention delivery
Nationwide policies, regulation,
or community information

Primary health clinic or
mobile outreach

First-level
hospitalb

Specialized cancer
center/unitc

Education on tobacco hazards, value of HPV and HBV vaccination, and importance of seeking early treatment for
common cancers
Palliative care, including, at a minimum, opioids for pain reliefd

Selected tobaccorelated cancers (oral,
lung, and esophagus)
900

Taxation; warning labels or plain
packaging; bans on public smoking,
advertising, and promotion; and
monitoring

Cessation advice and
services, mostly without
pharmacological therapies

Treat early-stage cancer
with curative intente

Breast cancer
280
Cervical cancer
180

School-based HPV vaccination

Opportunisticf screening
(visual inspection or HPV DNA
testing); treat precancerous
lesions

Colorectal cancer
210
Liver cancer
380
Childhood cancers
g

80

Treat precancerous
lesions

Treat early-stage cancer

Emergency
surgery for
obstruction

Treat early-stage cancer
with curative intent

Hepatitis B vaccination
(including birth dose)
Treat selected early-stage
cancer with curative
intent in pediatric cancer
units/hospitals

Note: Cancer totals are rounded to nearest 10,000. Education and basic palliative care are relevant for cancers at all ages. HBV = hepatitis B virus; HPV = human papillomavirus.
a. Red type denotes emergency care.
b. First-level hospitals are referred to as district hospitals in some countries.
c. Some interventions may take place at first-level hospitals, by a specialized surgeon visiting once per month, for example.
d. Palliative care should be available at all levels specified in the table and in the home.
e. Early-stage cancer generally refers to stages I and II.
f. Screening is opportunistic when a test is requested by a patient or offered by a practitioner to a patient attending for another reason. Organized screening is a well-defined
process including formal invitations to participate, recalls, reminders, tracking results, ensuring follow-up, monitoring, and reporting program performance results.
g. Including some solid tumors.

Summary

9

lower-middle-income, and upper-middle-income
countries. Most LMICs should be able to implement a
locally customized essential package that covers most of
their population by 2030, given anticipated increases in
public spending on health (Jamison and others 2013).
The schedule of implementation will vary, however,
as some interventions—in particular, higher tobacco
taxes and widespread pain palliation—can begin rapidly in many countries (Foley and others 2006; Sloan
and Gelband 2007). By contrast, affordable availability
of treatments that require considerable infrastructure
development may take many years to achieve fully after
a start is made.
Prevention
Most countries (183 worldwide) now vaccinate infants
against hepatitis B, with global coverage estimated at
81 percent in 2013. This will prevent many liver cancers some decades hence, but a birth dose, particularly
important in countries with high mother-to-child transmission, reached only 26 percent of newborns in 2011
(WHO 2011c).
Seventy-five countries (including HICs) have begun
national HPV vaccination programs and others are
developing experience with the vaccine (Gavi 2013).
In addition, Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, is supporting
pilot programs in several LICs in Sub-Saharan Africa.
The delivery cost of reaching adolescent girls with three
doses is the major barrier, as Gavi-subsidized vaccine
costs only US$0.20 to US$0.40 per dose, while program costs range between US$4 and US$13 per fully
immunized girl (Denny and others 2015; Gavi 2013).
Hepatitis B and HPV vaccinations will have their main
effect on mortality during the second half of the century, when the cohorts of immunized children reach
middle age.
Tobacco control, notably much higher tobacco excise
taxes (which result in marked increases in adult cessation), can have a more immediate effect: people who quit
smoking before age 40 years avoid more than 90 percent
of the risk they would have incurred had they continued
to smoke (Jha and Peto 2014). This means a substantial
saving of lives starting within 5–10 years after measures
are put in place. Higher cigarette taxes also discourage
youth initiation, which will prevent many deaths in the
second half of the century. However, cessation remains
uncommon in most LMICs, with adults quitting often
as a result of cancer and other diseases, and not to avoid
them. Only 28 countries are undertaking comprehensive
tobacco control programs that include high taxes as a
major strategy (WHO 2013). There are already some
notable successes: France and South Africa used large

10

Cancer

tax increases in the 1990s to triple the price of cigarettes;
by 2005, consumption had halved, but government revenues from tobacco had doubled (Van Walbeek 2005). In
France, lung cancer mortality among young adults fell
shortly after the tax was raised. Brazil has also reduced
smoking prevalence considerably (Monteiro and others
2007). Despite severe industry opposition, Mexico, and
very recently, India and the Philippines, have levied notable increases in cigarette taxes, and in Mexico cigarette
sales have already started to decline (Jha and others 2015,
chapter 10 in this volume; WHO 2013). The WHO’s
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control, adopted
by more than 180 countries, is an important enabler of
country action on tobacco (Jha 2015).
Screening
The emphasis on diagnosing and treating cancers while
they are still at an early stage might suggest the appropriateness of many cancer screening programs (Sullivan,
Sullivan, and Ginsburg 2015, chapter 12 in this volume), but population screening is expensive (even if
cost-effective, at least in some populations in HICs)
and requires considerable infrastructure. Only opportunistic cervical screening (with or without some added
outreach) meets the DCP3 criteria and is a suggested
component of an essential package. Screening using
visual inspection with acetic acid (which makes abnormal tissue appear white) can detect precancerous lesions
that can be treated inexpensively (often during the same
visit) to prevent cervical cancer from developing (Denny
and others 2015; Goss and others 2013). When convenient, rapid diagnostic tests for the main carcinogenic
types of HPV infection become affordable and available
for use by fieldworkers, they could make such screening
much more effective and reliable (Sankaranarayanan
and others 2009). Two or three such screenings per
lifetime, starting around age 35 years, at intervals of five
to10 years, should reduce lifetime cervical cancer risk by
more than half (Goldie and others 2005).
The essential package does not include any type
of screening for prostate or breast cancer. Both have
attracted significant controversy in HICs, although
for different reasons. The most widespread means of
prostate cancer screening is through a blood test for
prostate-specific antigen (PSA, a protein produced at
elevated levels by cancerous prostate cells), with or
without digital rectal examination. Although it is a
simple test, PSA is not supported by national programs
because it leads to overdiagnosis and overtreatment,
with many more men harmed by the side effects of
overtreatment than are saved from prostate cancer.
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force discourages

PSA testing (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 2012).
By contrast, screening mammography for breast cancer
is supported by most HICs as an expensive but moderately effective measure, although the optimal age range
for screening and screening frequency are still debated.
Clinical breast examination might be a viable option
in LMICs, but the effectiveness of this requires more
research (Anderson and others 2015). Other common
cancers with detectable precancerous stages are colorectal cancer (precancerous polyps) (Rabeneck and others
2015, chapter 6 in this volume) and oral cancer (visible
lesions) (Sankaranarayanan and others 2015, chapter 5
in this volume). Eventually, screening for more cancers
may be added, but it is likely to be appropriate after
effective treatment is established.
Diagnosis and Treatment
Accurate diagnosis is needed for cancer treatment, but
shortages of trained pathologists and other laboratory
technologists and lack of facilities and supplies critically
limit diagnostic capacity in many LMICs (Gospodarowicz
and others 2015, chapter 11 in this volume). In addition
to an initial diagnosis of cancer (often based on biopsy
specimens) that can help in assessing the need for major
surgery, diagnostic services can help determine treatment
strategies after surgery. The status of tumors, nodes, and
metastases has long been clinically useful, and other tests
on the tumor itself can determine post-surgical management. In particular, breast cancer surgical specimens
should undergo reliable testing to see if they carry the
estrogen receptor protein; if they do (that is, if the tumor
is ER+), endocrine treatment will substantially reduce
the risk of recurrence and death (box 1.4).
Treatment for early breast cancer and cervical cancer
includes some or all of the following: surgery, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and targeted (for example, endocrine) therapy, that is, all the basic components of cancer
care (Anderson and others 2011; Knaul and others 2011).
For early cervical cancer, surgery is the primary treatment and radiotherapy is an adjunct. For whatever
is considered complete treatment in a given country
context, all components of care should be accessible by
patients once treatment is started. Partial or incomplete
treatment can cause side effects, but with less chance of
clinical benefit.
Childhood cancer is rare (accounting for 1 percent of
cancer deaths in HICs), representing by far the smallest
burden of the cancers targeted by the essential package.
Although they cannot be prevented, many common
childhood cancers have high cure rates in HICs, making
them feasible targets (Gupta and others 2015). Cure
rates in most LMICs are far lower, but reasonably good

outcomes have been achieved in specialized childhood
cancer centers and through national referral and management plans, particularly for acute lymphoblastic
leukemia, Burkitt lymphoma, and Wilms tumor (Gupta
and others 2014).
Palliative Care
Many incurable cancers cause intractable pain. Opioid
medications can generally relieve this pain, greatly
improving the quality of the last few weeks or months
of life for patients and families. The simplest and least
expensive preparation, oral morphine, works for an
estimated 90 percent of patients with severe terminal
cancer pain (Foley and others 2006). It is also used by
patients with HIV/AIDS and some other chronic conditions. Palliative care is widely available only in HICs, but
it could be made available in LMICs quite rapidly, even
before other types of treatment. Palliative care includes
more than pain control and is relevant throughout the
course of illness, but pain control is the core and the
greatest need is at the end of life.
With appropriate organization and cooperation from
the government and the health care sector, opioids can
be provided even in rural areas, at home, at low cost. The
current reality is, however, that few people have access
to effective pain medicines because of unnecessary and
ill-conceived restrictions at the country level. In 2006
(with only marginal progress since then), 66 percent of
the world’s population lived in countries that had virtually no consumption of opioids, 10 percent in countries
with very low consumption, 3 percent in countries with
low consumption, and 4 percent in countries with moderate consumption (Seya and others 2011).
Local Priority Conditions
The essential package can be customized and augmented with locally appropriate and feasible interventions. Examples include improved storage of grain and
other foods to avoid fungal contamination that contributes to high liver cancer rates in parts of Africa and Asia
(Gelband and others 2015, chapter 8 in this volume;
Groopman, Kensler, and Wild 2008); opportunistic
screening (especially of high-risk tobacco users) and
treatment for precancerous lesions and early-stage oral
cancer in India and other countries with high oral cancer
burdens (Dikshit and others 2012; Sankaranarayanan
and others 2015); screening and treatment for colorectal
cancer in Argentina and Uruguay (Goss and others 2013;
Rabeneck and others 2015); and elimination of liver
flukes (with the drug praziquantel) to prevent bile duct
cancer in the limited areas where flukes are common,

Summary

11

Box 1.4

Possible Strategies for Treating Early Breast Cancer in LMICs
By definition, in early breast cancer (stage I or II),
all detectable disease can be removed surgically, but
micrometastases may remain that, perhaps years later,
cause recurrence and death. Adjuvant treatments
may be given after surgery to reduce this risk. In highincome countries, most women receiving appropriate treatment for early breast cancer survive their
disease (Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative
Group and others 2012). The success rate of breastconserving surgery (lumpectomy) plus radiotherapy
to the conserved breast is about the same as for mastectomy (removal of the entire breast, and perhaps
some local lymph nodes) and either can be offered,
if safe radiotherapy is available. The most basic
surgical procedure for stage II breast cancer is some
form of mastectomy (Anderson and others 2015).
In low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), for
women with early breast cancer, the first requirement
is good quality, safe surgery. In low-income countries
(LICs), in particular, timely access to safe surgery is
a major barrier. In middle-income countries (MICs),
where there is generally better population access to
surgical services, quality cancer surgery is the major
surgical concern, particularly adequate resection
of the tumor (Dare and others 2015). After technically successful surgery, treatments can be based on
estrogen-receptor (ER) status, estimated recurrence
risk, and general health (Anderson and others 2015).
The ER status of surgically removed breast cancers can be determined (for about US$10, in India).
If the cancer is ER-positive, about five years of endocrine drug therapy substantially reduces the 15-year
recurrence risk and is relatively nontoxic. Endocrine

or treatment of schistosomiasis to prevent bladder or
intestinal cancer in parts of Asia, the Middle East and
North Africa, and Sub-Saharan Africa (IARC 1994).
Finally, occupational hazards should be monitored and
mitigated where necessary, for example, use of power
tools on asbestos roofing or insulation, or heavy smoke
pollution in houses (IARC 2012).
As important as what to include in a national cancer package is what to exclude. Cancer is notorious for
exaggerated claims of causation (for example, nuclear

12

Cancer

drugs, such as tamoxifen or, for post-menopausal
women, an aromatase inhibitor (AI) (Early Breast
Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group and others
2015), can be dispensed safely to outpatients and are
available as relatively low-cost generics (although
even generic tamoxifen costs about US$15 per
year in India, and generic AIs currently cost about
US$50 per year). Chemotherapy also reduces recurrence but is more toxic and requires more careful
medical supervision to ensure safety and efficacy.
New drugs, for example, trastuzumab, that target
other breast cancer receptors are not at present
cost-effective in LMICs.
Relatively simple regimens of generic cytotoxic
drugs (for example, four cycles of daunorubicin and
cyclophosphamide with drug costs of about $200
in India) should be practicable wherever surgery is
practicable (Anderson and others 2015), and could
be offered to women who are otherwise in good
health but whose disease has already spread from the
breast to the local lymph nodes (Early Breast Cancer
Trialists’ Collaborative Group and others 2012).
More effective cytotoxic regimens (for example, with
taxanes) would increase toxicity, drug costs, and
supervision costs.
Finally, global initiatives might well help to
lower the cost of cancer drugs and other commodities, and develop and disseminate standardized resource-appropriate treatment protocols, such
as those developed by the Breast Health Global
Initiative. The successful global initiative to aid in
the diagnosis and treatment of HIV/AIDS provides
a model (Piot and Quinn 2013).

power plants and folic acid) and claims of cure, even of
advanced cancers and even within the health care system itself. A guidepost for the former category of claims
is IARC’s Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic
Risks to Humans, which, since 1971, have evaluated
more than 900 agents (http://monographs.iarc.fr/index.
php). Treating advanced cancers—although a common practice in HICs—is expensive, often painful for
patients, and usually futile. Countries should carefully
examine the resource requirements and likely success of

irinotecan (a relatively new treatment for colon cancer) are not currently considered cost-effective in the
United Kingdom (Tappenden and others 2007).
Excise taxes on tobacco (US$1–US$150 per
disability-adjusted life year [DALY] averted) and hepatitis B vaccination (less than US$100/DALY averted) are
very cost-effective in all LMICs. Opportunistic cervical
cancer screening and treatment of precancerous lesions
are likely also to be very cost-effective in all LMICs. The
cost-effectiveness of HPV vaccination depends crucially on vaccine cost, but at US$15/per girl vaccinated,
HPV vaccination is likely to be very cost-effective in all
LMICs. Some aspects of the treatment for early breast
cancer are cost-effective wherever breast cancer surgery
has been performed (mainly MICs; less than US$150/
DALY averted) (figure 1.2).

such treatments in deciding not only which cancers to
include in a package, but the appropriate interventions
by stage. For advanced cancers with little possibility of
cure, palliative care may be the best alternative.

COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF INTERVENTIONS
For most types of cancer, the cost-effectiveness literature for LMICs is slim (Horton and Gauvreau 2015,
chapter 16 in this volume): nine studies were identified
for breast cancer, two (plus four from high-income
Asian countries) for colorectal cancer, one for liver
cancer prevention, and none for pediatric cancer.
Seventeen studies were sourced from an expert search
for cervical cancer, and a recent systematic review of
vaccines (Ozawa and others 2012) identified three
studies for hepatitis B vaccination. A useful benchmark
was to exclude from the essential package those interventions that are not clearly cost-effective in HICs.
Most new drug treatments for advanced cancer fall
in this category, such as bevacizumab (a monoclonal
antibody) for metastatic breast cancer, which, at current prices, does not meet cost-effectiveness criteria
in the United Kingdom (Rodgers and others 2011)
and other HICs (Dedes and others 2009; Montero
and others 2012). Similarly, cetuximab (a monoclonal
antibody for metastatic colon and lung cancers) plus

COSTS OF PACKAGES
To provide per capita cost estimates for an essential package, we used available information on cost combined
with demographic information from three large, diverse
countries (Brazil, India, and Nigeria) (expressed in 2012
U.S. dollars). Although Nigeria is a lower-middle-income
country, we used its demographic structure and lack
of existing facilities and human resources to represent
the scenario of LICs, mainly in Sub-Saharan Africa.

Figure 1.2 Cost-Effectiveness of Selected Interventions

Treat breast cancer LIC (1)
Screen and treat breast cancer LIC (1)
Screen and treat breast cancer MIC (2)
a

HPV vaccination @ $240+/girl (3)
Treat colorectal cancer LIC (4)

Non price interventions for tobacco (5)
Treat breast cancer MIC (2)
a

HPV vaccination @$50/girl MIC (6)
Hepatitis B vaccination LIC (7)

33% Price increase via tobacco tax (5)
1

10

Cost per DALY saved US $2012

100

1,000

10,000

Range

Sources: (1) Zelle and others 2012; (2) Salomon and others 2012; (3) Insinga and others 2007; Praditsitthikorn and others 2011; Termrungruanglert and others 2012; (4) Ginsberg and
others 2010; (5) Jha and others 2006; (6) Kawai and others 2012; Vanni and others 2012; (7) Prakash 2003; Griffiths, Hutton, and Das Dores Pascal 2005; Kim, Salomon,
and Goldie 2007.
Note: Studies used for calculations were from a systematic search, whose findings are available online (annex 16A). Cost-effectiveness has not been calculated for elements of the
essential package for which relevant data were entirely lacking. DALY = disability-adjusted life year; HPV = human papillomavirus; LIC = low-income country; MIC = middle-income
country; QALY = quality-adjusted life year.
a. Based on a study reporting QALYs, not DALYs (the difference is small when interventions primarily reduce mortality).

Summary

13

To account for training, pathology services, and other
system costs, we used a multiplier, equal to 50 percent of
the intervention-based costs, drawn from similar costing
studies for nutrition (Bhutta and others 2013) and health
systems (Rao Seshadri and others 2015). However, we did
not include the one-time investment costs for building
hospitals, clinics, and other infrastructure that would
eventually be needed to support cancer and other clinical
services (Gospodarowicz and others 2015; Sloan and
Gelband 2007).
The DCP3 essential package of cancer control interventions would cost roughly an additional US$5.70

per capita in upper-middle-income countries, and
US$1.70 per capita in both lower-middle-income
countries and LICs (table 1.5). The annual cost of the
essential package of cancer services (table 1.6) in 2013
dollars would be about US$13.8 billion, US$4.4 billion, and US$1.4 billion in those groups of countries,
respectively. There are obvious caveats on the precision of the costs, including uncertainties of these costs
by 2030. Importantly, drug costs can fall substantially
as drugs go off patent, and global initiatives could further reduce the prices of key generic drugs and other
commodities.

Table 1.5 Approximate Per Capita Marginal Costs of the Essential Package for Low-Income,
Lower-Middle-Income, and Upper-Middle-Income Countries
(2012 U.S. dollars)
Lowincome

Lower-middleIncome

Upper-middleincome

Comprehensive tobacco control measures

0.05

0.07

1.06

Palliative care and pain control

0.05

0.06

0.06

HBV vaccination

0.08

0.04

0.04

Intervention

Promote early diagnosis and treat early-stage breast cancer

0.43

0.43

1.29

HPV vaccination

0.23

0.23

0.40

Screen and treat precancerous lesions and early-stage cervical cancer

0.26

0.29

0.87

Treat selected childhood cancers

0.03

0.03

0.09

Subtotal

1.13

1.15

3.81

Ancillary services (50% of subtotal)

0.57

0.58

1.91

TOTAL COSTS

1.70

1.73

5.72

Source: Based on online annex 1A and Horton and Gauvreau 2015, annex 16A.
Note: HPV = human papillomavirus; HBV = hepatitis B virus.

Table 1.6 Resource Requirements for the Essential Cancer Intervention Package for LMICs
Expenditures

Low-income

Lower-middle income

Upper-middle income

Total LMICs

Public spending on health as % GDP,
2013

2.0

1.8

3.1

3.0

Total public spending on health in
2013 (US$ billions)

11

89

534

634

Required amount for cancer in 2013
(US$ billions)

1.4

4.4

13.8

19.6

Cancer package as % of total public
spending on health in 2013a

13.0

4.9

2.6

3.1

Note: GDP = gross domestic product; LMICs = low- and middle-income countries.
a. Based on spending data from World Bank 2014b.

14

Cancer

AFFORDABILITY AND DOMESTIC FINANCING
OF ESSENTIAL CANCER SERVICES
The total estimated annual cost of the essential package of cancer interventions for all LMICs is about
$20 billion dollars (2013 U.S. dollars). A useful metric
is the cost of the package as a proportion of current
total public spending on health. This is 2.6 percent in
UMICs, 5 percent in lower-middle-income countries,
and 13 percent in LICs. By comparison, HICs devote
3–7 percent of their total health spending to cancer
control (OECD 2013). Most LMICs allocate far less;
cancer currently accounts for about 1 percent of health
spending (public and private) in Brazil and India, and
2 percent in China and Mexico (Goss and others 2013;
IARC 2014; Knaul and others 2011).
Financing for cancer control will have to come
mainly from national health care budgets, particularly
in MICs, where rising incomes are enabling expansion
of public financing for health (Jamison and others 2013;
Knaul and others 2015, chapter 17 in this volume).
South Africa, for example, has assessed which interventions it might include in an expanded national health
insurance package (Shisana and others 2006) and similar work is underway in India (Jha and Laxminarayan
2009; Rao Seshadri and others 2015). In LICs, it would
be inappropriate for governments to shift to spending 13 percent of their health care dollars on cancer.
External assistance will be needed in those countries to
establish an expansion path for cancer control.
A clear principle to adopt is the eventual goal of
coverage for every person—even if coverage expands
gradually—but not coverage of everything (WHO
2000), since poorly conceived plans may provide coverage of more expensive treatments for a few, while missing the opportunity to expand cost-effective population
coverage. Public finance is not necessarily synonymous
with public delivery (Musgrove 1996). Properly regulated private hospitals, facilities, and providers can be
contracted to deliver cancer control interventions (Jha
and Laxminarayan 2009).
Several countries in Latin America are already
expanding their health insurance systems from coverage
limited to occupational groups or selected vulnerable
groups, to more comprehensive coverage (Goss and
others 2013). However, for some lower-middle-income
countries and most LICs, substantial increases in public finance for health, paired with economic growth
or external assistance, would be needed to adopt a full
package of interventions (Jamison and others 2013).
Even those countries could benefit from considering
the future cancer burden, costs, and financing to project
a future cancer control plan. Higher tobacco taxes are the

most important single cancer prevention intervention
at a practical level, and a tripling of the excise tax on
tobacco (thereby approximately doubling prices) could
mobilize an additional US$100 billion worldwide in
annual revenue (Jha and Peto 2014). For all LMICs, the
epidemiologic dividend that accrues from a decreased
burden of infectious disease should generate savings that
can be spent on NCD control (Jamison and others 2011).

IMPLEMENTATION CHALLENGES FOR THE
ESSENTIAL PACKAGE
Within the essential package, some aspects of interventions may be implemented reasonably quickly, notably
tobacco control measures that involve taxation and
regulation (Jha and others 2015) and policy changes to
increase access to opioids (although establishing nationwide programs and training a full cadre of providers may
take years) (Cleary, Gelband, and Wagner 2015). Some
interventions can be scaled to reasonably high coverage
quickly with existing infrastructure, such as school-based
HPV vaccination for adolescent girls, or hepatitis B vaccination for newborns. By contrast, other interventions
will need expanded clinical access, most notably surgical
treatment of early-stage breast cancer and cervical cancer (Dare and others 2015, chapter 13 in this volume).
Increasing surgical capacity is relatively expensive but
feasible from an organizational perspective, especially
if existing district hospitals can be strengthened (Mock
and others 2015) (paired with central cancer clinical
expertise). When high quality surgery becomes available, early-stage, resectable tumors of various types, in
addition to breast and cervical lesions, can be removed.
Expanding chemotherapy treatment requires an extensive network of laboratories and follow-up, which in
LICs and lower-middle-income countries is currently
feasible only in urban areas. Scaling up radiotherapy
requires large capital expenditures, and substantial attention to clinical guidelines and treatment protocols as well
as safety assurances (Jaffray and Gospodarowicz 2015,
chapter 14 in this volume).
Particularly for LICs where minimal cancer services
exist in the public sector, the needed expertise and
resources for cancer treatment will require years of
steady investment to expand physical and human infrastructure. Elements that are missing or in short supply
in LMICs (Bray and others 2014; Dikshit and others
2012; Gospodarowicz and others 2015) include trained
professionals in oncology and relevant disciplines;
appropriately-equipped facilities, including radiotherapy
facilities, pathology services, and other laboratory testing
services (for example, estrogen-receptor testing for breast

Summary

15

cancer tissue; box 1.3); supplies, including chemotherapy drugs; geographic access to facilities with affordable
cancer services, including surgery; public awareness of
the availability and effectiveness of cancer control interventions; and cancer incidence and cause-of-death data.
As more people are successfully treated and live for many
years, survivorship services (for example, rehabilitation,
remedies for physical deficits caused by treatment, limiting the social stigma associated with having had cancer,
and follow-up for recurrence) will increase in importance (Hewitt, Greenfield, and Stovall 2005), but costs for
survivorship are not included in our estimates.
The package emphasizes treatment for early-stage
cervical and breast cancers (and similarly, early stages
for other cancers included in specific country plans),
because cure rates are substantially higher than they are
for more advanced cancers. Surgery is particularly
important, as surgery alone is curative for many early
cancers. Although locally appropriate cervix screening,
which will identify many precancers and early cancers,
is included in the package, there is no corresponding
screening intervention for breast cancer. Even without
screening, however, LMICs might be able to achieve
a somewhat earlier stage of presentation of common
cancers by making affordable treatment available and
communicating this to people. Historical evidence from
HICs, illustrated by stage-shifting for cervix cancer in
Sweden before organized screening began around 1960,
supports this approach (Pontén and others 1995).
Cancer treatment can be organized through existing medical facilities (particularly district hospitals) or
through specialized centers, but the key is to ensure good
links between facilities (Sloan and Gelband 2007), which
requires a centralized locus of control and the ability to
adjust elements of the system that are not working to the
benefit of patients (Gospodarowicz and others 2015). An
example from childhood cancer illustrates this well. All
children with cancer in Honduras (population 8 million)
are treated in two centers that collaborate and communicate closely (Metzger and others 2003). In contrast, children with cancer in Colombia (population 48 million) are
treated in more than 150 health care institutions of varying size, with little to no communication between centers
(Gupta and others 2015). This adversely affects patient
outcomes and costs. India, population 1.3 billion, faces
more challenging coordination of care, but is building a
National Cancer Grid (Pramesh, Badwe, and Sinha 2014)
linking non-specialist hospitals to specialist cancer centers
and providing them with current treatment protocols.
Building and improving a nation’s cancer control
capacity requires attention to the quality of services,
from pathology and diagnosis to surgery, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and palliative care (Gospodarowicz

16

Cancer

and others 2015). Upgrading hospitals to provide
basic cancer surgical services (Mock and others 2015),
developing cancer referral networks, tracking service
performance, integrating the delivery of different types
of services, and ensuring that financial flows accompany
services are also required.

GLOBAL INITIATIVES FOR CANCER CONTROL
Only 1 percent of the US$30 billion development assistance for health in 2010 was allocated to NCDs, only a
portion of which was for cancer (IHME 2012). NCD
funding is likely to increase somewhat with increasing global recognition of the importance of NCDs.
However, it is unlikely that significant global funds will
be allocated to support national health systems to deal
with cancer. As additional funding becomes available,
we suggest three priorities for international support.
1. Lower the costs to countries of key inputs for the
essential package and other cost-effective interventions, such as HPV and other vaccines, cancer drugs
(including generics), screening tests (for example,
HPV tests), laboratory reagents and other test commodities, surgery, radiotherapy machines, and other
relevant goods. The Global Fund for AIDS, TB and
Malaria; Gavi; the Clinton Health Access Initiative;
and other international partnerships have developed mechanisms to reduce the price of a range of
global commodities relevant to infectious disease
control, utilizing economies of scale (relevant for
purchases of drugs or radiotherapy machines),
subsidies for reputable and affordable medicines,
advanced market commitments, and similar innovations (Piot and Quinn 2013). Similar efforts for
cancer are possible, for example, as has been proposed for radiotherapy by the Global Task Force
on Radiotherapy for Cancer Control (Union for
International Cancer Control [UICC]).
2. Expand technical assistance in cancer control.
International and regional networks exist for many
aspects of cancer care, such as treatment guidelines; networks on breast, cervical, and colorectal cancer screening; childhood cancer treatment
and research; and palliative care. Other support
modalities, for example, twinning institutions, have
typically involved institutions in HICs and LICs
(North-South collaborations), but as in other areas,
the opportunities should grow to add South-South
collaborations. Within countries, peer-based and
professional standards of cancer care and reporting
of outcomes and performance for various facilities

can improve quality of care (Peabody and others
2006; Varmus and Trimble 2011).
3. Support for research is a worthwhile investment for
overseas developmental assistance. Research priorities include tracking national cancer burdens, clinical
trials, and implementation science, including research
on delivery systems; cancer epidemiology and biology; widely practicable, low-cost technologies; and
economics (Trimble and others 2015, chapter 15 in
this volume).

BENEFITS OF EXPANDED CANCER CONTROL
Despite substantial challenges in most LMICs, appreciable reductions in the cancer burden might well be
possible by 2030, with even greater reductions by 2050
and beyond (Norheim and others 2014), particularly
through treating common cancers that are detected
early, tobacco control that encourages widespread adult
smoking cessation, and vaccination against hepatitis B
and HPV.
Global cancer death rates at ages 0–69 years were
declining at about 10 percent per decade during 2000–
10. If this were to continue, then from 2010 to 2030
cancer death rates will fall by almost 20 percent. A
decrease of one-third in global cancer death rates by
2030, as proposed recently (Norheim and others 2014),
would require faster progress in LMICs, particularly
marked increases in tobacco cessation. The WHO estimates that tobacco control, HPV and HBV vaccination,
and opportunistic cervical cancer screening could avoid
about 6 percent of cancer deaths by 2030 (or about
200,000 deaths before age 70 years annually). The DCP3
essential package could achieve greater reductions. If, as
expected, the availability of treatment shifts diagnoses
for common, treatable cancers to earlier stages, further
lives could be saved. The benefits of pain relief are not
measured in lives saved, but are important.
Finally, cancer control contributes to reduced inequality in health, providing relatively larger benefits to the
poor. In China, increased tobacco taxes and access to cervical cancer prevention, such as screening and HPV vaccination, would disproportionately benefit those in the
lowest income quintile by reducing deaths and through
better financial risk protection from catastrophic health
expenditures (Levin and others 2015, chapter 18 in this
volume; Verguet and others 2015).
Cancer control is often approached with pessimism,
but practicable, deliberate, cost-effective steps can enable
many countries to reduce substantially by 2030 the
suffering and premature death from cancer, with much
greater improvements by 2050.

NOTES
Maps and figures in this chapter are based on incidence and
mortality estimates for ages 0–69, consistent with reporting in
all DCP3 volumes. The discussion of burden (including risk
factors) and interventions, however, includes all ages unless
otherwise noted.
The World Bank classifies countries according to four
income groupings. Income is measured using gross national
income per capita, in U.S. dollars, converted from local currency using the World Bank Atlas method. Classifications as of
July 2014 are as follows:
•
•

•

Low-income countries = US$1,045 or less in 2013
Middle-income countries are subdivided:
• Lower-middle-income = US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income = US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries = US$12,746 or more

DCP3 CANCER AUTHOR GROUP
Issac Adewole, Hemantha Amarasinghe, Benjamin
O. Anderson, Federico G. Antillon, Samira Asma,
Rifat Atun, Rajendra A. Badwe, Freddie Bray, Frank
J. Chaloupka, Ann Chao, Chien-Jen Chen, Wendong
Chen, James Cleary, Anna J. Dare, Anil D’Cruz,
Lynette Denny, Craig Earle, Silvia Franceschi, Cindy L.
Gauvreau, Hellen Gelband, Ophira M. Ginsburg, Mary
K. Gospodarowicz, Thomas Gross, Prakash C. Gupta,
Sumit Gupta, Andrew Hall, Mhamed Harif, Rolando
Herrero, Susan Horton, Scott C. Howard, Stephen P.
Hunger, Andre Ilbawi, Trijn Israels, David A. Jaffray,
Dean T. Jamison, Prabhat Jha, Newell Johnson, Jamal
Khader, Jane J. Kim, Felicia Knaul, Carol Levin, Joseph
Lipscomb, W. Thomas London, Mary MacLennan,
Katherine A. McGlynn, Monika L. Metzger, Raul
Murillo, Zachary Olson, Sherif Omar, Krishna
Palipudi, C. S. Pramesh, You-Lin Qiao, Linda Rabeneck,
Preetha Rajaraman, Kunnambath Ramadas, Chintanie
Ramasundarahettige, Timothy Rebbeck, Carlos
Rodriguez-Galindo, Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan,
Monisha Sharma, Ju-Fang Shi, Isabelle Soerjomataram,
Lisa Stevens, Sujha Subramanian, Richard Sullivan,
Terrence Sullivan, David Thomas, Edward L. Trimble,
Joann Trypuc, Stéphane Verguet, Judith Wagner, ShaoMing Wang, Christopher P. Wild, Pooja Yerramilli,
Cheng-Har Yip, Ayda Yurekli, Witold Zatoński, Ann G.
Zauber, and Fang-Hui Zhao.

REFERENCES
Allemani, C., H. K. Weir, H. Carreira, R. Harewood,
D. Spika, and others. 2015. “Global Surveillance of Cancer
Survival 1995–2009: Analysis of Individual Data for

Summary

17

25,676,887 Patients from 279 Population-Based Registries
in 67 Countries (CONCORD-2).” The Lancet 385 (9972):
977–1010. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(14)62038-9.
Anderson, B. O., E. Cazap, N. S. El Saghir, C. H. Yip,
H. M. Khaled, and others. 2011. “Optimisation of Breast
Cancer Management in Low-Resource and Middle-Resource
Countries: Executive Summary of the Breast Health Global
Initiative Consensus, 2010.” The Lancet Oncology (4):
387–98. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70031-6.
Anderson, B. O., J. Lipscomb, R. H. Murillo, and D. R. Thomas.
2015. “Breast Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume
3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Bhutta, Z. A., J. K. Das, A. Rizvi, M. F. Gaffey, N. Walker,
and others. 2013. “Evidence-Based Interventions for
Improvement of Maternal and Child Nutrition: What
Can Be Done and At What Cost?” The Lancet 382 (9890):
452–77. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)60996-4.
Bray, F., and I. Soerjomataram. 2015. “The Changing Global
Burden of Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3,
Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Bray, F., A. Znaor, P. Cueva, A. Korir, R. Swaminathan, and
others. 2014. “Planning and Developing Population-Based
Cancer Registration in Low- and Middle-Income Settings.”
Technical Publications, International Agency for Research
on Cancer.
Brown, M. L., S. J. Goldie, G. Draisma, J. Harford, and
J. Lipscomb. 2006. “Health Service Interventions for Cancer
Control in Developing Countries.” In Disease Control
Priorities in Developing Countries, edited by D. T. Jamison,
J. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, and
others. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford University Press and
World Bank.
Cleary, J., H. Gelband, and J. Wagner. 2015. “Cancer Pain
Relief.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer,
edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and
S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. 2001.
Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for Economic
Development. Geneva: World Health Organization.
Dare, A. J., B. O. Anderson, R. Sullivan, C. S. Pramesh,
C.-H. Yip, and others. 2015. “Surgical Services for Cancer
Care.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer,
edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and
S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Dedes, K. J., K. Matter-Walstra, M. Schwenkglenks,
B. C. Pestalozzi, D. Fink, and others. 2009. “Bevacizumab
in Combination with Paclitaxel for HER-2 Negative
Metastatic Breast Cancer: An Economic Evaluation.”
European Journal of Cancer 45 (8): 1397–406. doi:10.1016/J.
Ejca.2008.12.016.
Denny, L., R. Herrero, C. Levin, and J. J. Kim. 2015. “Cervical
Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer,
edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and
S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Dikshit, R., P. C. Gupta, C. Ramasundarahettige, V. Gajalakshmi,
L. Aleksandrowicz, and others. 2012. “Cancer Mortality in

18

Cancer

India: A Nationally Representative Survey.” The Lancet 379
(9828): 1807–16. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60358-4.
Early Breast Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group, Writing
Committee, R. Peto, C. Davies, J. Godwin, R. Gray,
and others. 2012. “Comparisons between Different
Polychemotherapy Regimens for Early Breast Cancer:
Meta-Analyses of Long-Term Outcome among 100,000
Women in 123 Randomised Trials.” The Lancet 379 (9814):
432–44. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(11)61625-5.
———. Forthcoming. “Aromatase Inhibitors vs. Tamoxifen
in Early Breast Cancer: Patient-Level Meta-Analysis of the
Randomised Trials.” The Lancet.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, C. Mathers, and
others. 2015. “Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide:
Sources, Methods and Major Patterns in GLOBOCAN
2012.” International Journal of Cancer 136 (5): E359–86.
doi:10.1002/Ijc.29210.
Foley, K. M., J. L. Wagner, D. E. Joranson, and H. Gelband.
2006. “Pain Control for People with Cancer and AIDS.” In
Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, edited
by D. T. Jamison, J. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne,
M. Claeson, and others. 2nd ed. New York: Oxford
University Press and World Bank.
Gavi. 2013. “Millions of Girls in Developing Countries To Be
Protected against Cervical Cancer Thanks to New HPV
Vaccine Deals.” Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance.
Gelband, H., C.-J. Chen, W. Chen, S. Franceschi, A. Hall,
and others. 2015. “Liver Cancer.” In Disease Control
Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Ginsberg, G. M., S. S. Lim, J. A. Lauer, B. P. Johns, and
C. R. Sepulveda. 2010. “Prevention, Screening and
Treatment of Colorectal Cancer: A Global and Regional
Generalized Cost Effectiveness Analysis.” Cost Effectiveness
and Resource Allocation 8: 2. doi:10.1186/1478-7547-8-2.
Goldie, S. J., L. Gaffikin, J. D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, A. GordilloTobar, C. Levin, and others. 2005. “Cost-Effectiveness of
Cervical-Cancer Screening in Five Developing Countries.”
New England Journal of Medicine 353 (20): 2158–68.
doi:10.1056/Nejmsa044278.
Gospodarowicz, M. K., J. Trypuc, A. D’Cruz, J. Khader, S. Omar,
and others. 2015. “Cancer Services and the Comprehensive
Cancer Care Center.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3,
Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Goss, Paul E., Brittany L. Lee, T. Badovinac-Crnjevic,
K. Strasser-Weippl, Y. Chavarri-Guerra, and others. 2013.
“Planning Cancer Control in Latin America and the
Caribbean.” The Lancet Oncology 14 (5): 391–436.
Greenberg, D., C. Earle, C. H. Fang, A. Eldar-Lissai, and
P. J. Neumann. 2010. “When Is Cancer Care Cost-Effective?
A Systematic Overview of Cost-Utility Analyses in
Oncology.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 102 (2):
82–8. doi:10.1093/Jnci/Djp472.
Griffiths, U. K., G. Hutton, and E. Das Dores Pascoal. 2005.
“The Cost-Effectiveness of Introducing Hepatitis B Vaccine
into Infant Immunization Services in Mozambique.”

Health Policy Planning 20 (1): 50–59. doi:10.1093/Heapol
/Czi006.
Groopman, J. D., T. W. Kensler, and C. P. Wild. 2008.
“Protective Interventions to Prevent Aflatoxin-Induced
Carcinogenesis in Developing Countries.” Annual Review
of Public Health 29: 187–203. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/pubmed/17914931.
Gupta, S., S. C. Howard, S. P. Hunger, F. G. Antillon,
M. L. Metzger, and others. 2015. “Childhood Cancers.”
In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer, edited by
H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton.
3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Gupta, S., R. Rivera-Luna, R. C. Ribeiro, and S. C. Howard.
2014. “Pediatric Oncology as the Next Global Child
Health Priority: The Need for National Childhood Cancer
Strategies in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” PloS
Med 11 (6): E1001656. doi:10.1371/Journal.Pmed.1001656.
Hamid, S. A., S. M. Ahsan, and A. Begum. 2014. “DiseaseSpecific Impoverishment Impact of Out-of-Pocket
Payments for Health Care: Evidence from Rural Bangladesh.”
Applied Health Economics and Health Policy 12 (4): 421–33.
doi:10.1007/S40258-014-0100-2.
Hewitt, M., S. Greenfield, and E. Stovall. 2005. From
Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition.
Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine and National
Research Council.
Hoang Lan, N., W. Laohasiriwong, J. F. Stewart, N. D. Tung,
and P. C. Coyte. 2013. “Cost of Treatment for Breast
Cancer in Central Vietnam.” Global Health Action 6: 18872.
doi:10.3402/Gha.V6i0.18872.
Horton, S., and C. L. Gauvreau. 2015. “Cancer in Low- and
Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview.” In
Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer, edited by
H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton.
3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 1994.
“Mongraphs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks
to Humans: Volume 61, Schistosomes, Liver Flukes and
Helicobacter Pylori.” Lyon, IARC, France.
———. 2012. “Mongraphs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic
Risks to Humans: Volume 100.” Lyon, IARC, France.
———. 2014. “World Cancer Report 2014.” In World Cancer
Report, edited by B. W. Stewart and C. P. Wild. Geneva: IARC.
IHME (Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation). 2012.
Financing Global Health 2012: The End of the Golden Age?
Seattle: IHME.
Ilbawi, A. M., E. M. Einterz, and D. Nkusu. 2013. “Obstacles to
Surgical Services in a Rural Cameroonian District Hospital.”
World Journal of Surgery 37 (6): 1208–15. doi:10.1007
/S00268-013-1977-X.
Insinga, R. P., E. J. Dasbach, E. H. Elbasha, A. Puig, and
L. M. Reynales-Shigematsu. 2007. “Cost-Effectiveness of
Quadrivalent Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccination
in Mexico: A Transmission Dynamic Model-Based
Evaluation.” Vaccine 26 (1): 128–39. doi:10.1016/J
.Vaccine.2007.10.056.
Jaffray, D. A., and M. K. Gospodarowicz. 2015. “Radiation
Therapy for Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3,

Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Jamison, D. T., J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne,
M. Claeson, and others. 2006. Disease Control Priorities
in Developing Countries. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Oxford
University Press and World Bank.
Jamison, D. T. 2015. “Disease Control Priorities, 3rd edition:
Improving Health and Reducing Poverty.” The Lancet
Feb 4. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60097-6. doi: 10.1016/
s0140-6736(15)60097-6
Jamison, D. T., P. Jha, V. Malhotra, and S. Verguet. 2011.
“The 20th Century Transformation of Human Health:
Its Magnitude and Value.” In How Much Have Global
Problems Cost The World? A Scorecard From 1900–2050,
edited by B. Lomborg. Cambridge, U.K:. Cambridge
University Press.
Jamison, D. T., W. Mosley, A. R. Measham, and J. Bobadilla, eds.
1993. Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries. 1st
ed. New York: Oxford University Press.
Jamison, D. T., L. H. Summers, G. Alleyne, K. J. Arrow,
S. Berkley, and others. 2013. “Global Health 2035: A World
Converging within a Generation.” The Lancet 382 (9908):
1898–955. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(13)62105-4.
Jha, P. 2009. “Avoidable Global Cancer Deaths and Total Deaths
from Smoking.” Nature Reviews Cancer 9 (9): 655–64.
doi:10.1038/Nrc2703.
———. 2015. “Deaths and Taxes: Stronger Global Tobacco
Control by 2025.” The Lancet 385 (9972): 918–20.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(15)60464-0.
Jha, P., F. J. Chaloupka, J. Moore, V. Gajalakshmi, P. C. Gupta,
and others. 2006. “Tobacco Addiction.” In Disease Control
Priorities in Developing Countries, edited by D. T. Jamison,
J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, and
others. 2nd ed. Washington, DC: Oxford University Press
and World Bank.
Jha, P., and R. Laxminarayan. 2009. Choosing Health: An
Entitlement for All Indians. Toronto: Centre for Global
Health Research.
Jha, P., M. Maclennan, A. Yurekli, C. Ramasundarahettige,
K. Palipudi, and others. 2015. “Global Hazards of Tobacco,
Benefits of Cessation and of Taxation of Tobacco.” In
Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer, edited by
H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton.
3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Jha, P., and R. Peto. 2014. “Global Effects of Smoking, of
Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco.” New England Journal of
Medicine 370 (1): 60–68. doi:10.1056/Nejmra1308383.
John, R. M., H. Y. Sung, W. B. Max, and H. Ross. 2011.
“Counting 15 Million More Poor in India, Thanks to
Tobacco.” Tobacco Control 20 (5): 349–52. doi:10.1136
/Tc.2010.040089.
Kawai, K., G. T. De Araujo, M. Fonseca, M. Pillsbury, and
P. K. Singhal. 2012. “Estimated Health and Economic Impact
of Quadrivalent HPV (Types 6/11/16/18) Vaccination
in Brazil Using a Transmission Dynamic Model.” BMC
Infectious Diseases 12: 250. doi:10.1186/1471-2334-12-250.
Kim, S. Y., J. A. Salomon, and S. J. Goldie. 2007. “Economic
Evaluation of Hepatitis B Vaccination in Low-Income

Summary

19

Countries: Using Cost-Effectiveness Affordability Curves.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization 85 (11): 833–42.
Knaul, F. M., E. Gonzalez-Pier, O. Gomez-Dantes, D. GarciaJunco, H. Arreola-Ornelas, and others. 2012. “The Quest
for Universal Health Coverage: Achieving Social Protection
for All in Mexico.” The Lancet 380 (9849): 1259–79.
doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61068-X.
Knaul, F. M., J. R. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadalia, eds.
2011. Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Global Equity Initiative and
Harvard University Press.
Knaul, F., S. Horton, P. Yerramilli, H. Gelband, and R. Atun.
2015. “Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings.”
In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer, edited by
H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton.
3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Levin, C. E., M. Sharma, Z. Olson, S. Verguet, J. F. Shi, and
others. 2015. “An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of
Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to Prevent Cervical
Cancer in China.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3,
Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Mallath, M. K., D. G. Taylor, R. A. Badwe, G. K. Rath, V. Shanta,
and others. 2014. “The Growing Burden of Cancer in India:
Epidemiology and Social Context.” The Lancet Oncology
15 (6): E205–12. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(14)70115-9.
Metzger, M. L., S. C. Howard, L. C. Fu, A. Pena, R. Stefan, and
others. 2003. “Outcome of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukaemia in Resource-Poor Countries.” The Lancet
362 (9385): 706–08. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14228-6.
Mock, C. N., P. Donkor, A. Gawande, D. T. Jamison, M. E. Kruk,
and others. 2015. “Essential Surgery: Key Messages from
Disease Control Priorities, (third edition).” The Lancet
(Feb 4. pii: S0140-6736(15)60091-5.). doi:10.1016/
S0140-6736(15)60091-5.
Montero, A. J., K. Avancha, S. Gluck, and G. Lopes. 2012.
“A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Bevacizumab in Combination
with Paclitaxel in the First-Line Treatment of Patients
with Metastatic Breast Cancer.” Breast Cancer Research and
Treatment 132 (2): 747–51. doi:10.1007/S10549-011-1919-Y.
Monteiro, C. A., T. M. Cavalcante, E. C. Moura, R. M. Claro,
and C. L. Szwarcwald. 2007. “Population-Based Evidence
of a Strong Decline in the Prevalence of Smokers in Brazil
(1989–2003).” Bulletin of the World Health Organization
85 (7): 527–34.
Musgrove, P. 1996. “Public and Private Roles in Health: Theory
and Financing Patterns.” Health, Nutrition and Population
Discussion Paper. World Bank, Washington, DC.
Norheim, O. F., P. Jha, K. Admasu, T. Godal, R. J. Hum, and
others. 2014. “Avoiding 40% of the Premature Deaths in
Each Country, 2010–30: Review of National Mortality
Trends to Help Quantify the UN Sustainable Development
Goal for Health.” The Lancet 385 (9964): 239–52. doi:10.1016
/S0140-6736(14)61591-9.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-Operation and
Development). 2013. Cancer Care: Assuring Quality to Improve
Survival. Health Policy Studies, OECD.

20

Cancer

Ozawa, S., A. Mirelman, M. L. Stack, D. G. Walker, and
O. S. Levine. 2012. “Cost-Effectiveness and Economic
Benefits of Vaccines in Low- and Middle-Income Countries:
A Systematic Review.” Vaccine 31 (1): 96–108. doi:10.1016/J
.Vaccine.2012.10.103.
Peabody, J. W., M. M. Taguiwalo, D. A. Robalino, and J. Frenk.
2006. “Improving the Quality of Care in Developing
Countries.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing
Countries, edited by D. T. Jamison, J. Breman, A. R. Measham,
G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, and others. 2nd ed. New York:
Oxford University Press and World Bank.
Piot, P., and T. C. Quinn. 2013. “Response to the AIDS
Pandemic: A Global Health Model.” New England Journal of
Medicine 368 (23): 2210–18. doi:10.1056/Nejmra1201533.
Pontén, J., H.-O. Adami, R. Bergstrom, J. Dillner, L-G. Friberg,
and others. 1995. “Strategies for Global Control of Cervical
Cancer.” International Journal of Cancer 60: 1–26.
Praditsitthikorn, N., Y. Teerawattananon, S. Tantivess,
S. Limwattananon, A. Riewpaiboon, and others. 2011.
“Economic Evaluation of Policy Options for Prevention and
Control of Cervical Cancer in Thailand.” Pharmacoeconomics
29 (9): 781–806. doi:10.2165/11586560-000000000-00000.
Prakash, C. 2003. “Crucial Factors that Influence
Cost-Effectiveness of Universal Hepatitis B Immunization
in India.” International Journal of Technology Assessment in
Health Care 19 (1): 28–40.
Pramesh, C., R. Badwe, and R. Sinha. 2014. “The National Cancer
Grid of India.” Indian Journal of Medical and Paediatric
Oncology 35 (3): 226–27. doi:10.4103/0971-5851.142040.
Rabeneck, L., S. Horton, A. G. Zauber, and C. Earle. 2015.
“Colorectal Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3,
Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Rao Seshadri, S., P. Jha, P. Sati, C. Gauvreau, U. Ram, and
others. 2015. Karnataka’s Roadmap to Improved Health:
Cost Effective Solutions to Address Priority Diseases, Reduce
Poverty and Increase Economic Growth. Report, Azim Premji
University, Bangalore, India.
Rodgers, M., M. Soares, D. Epstein, H. Yang, D. Fox, and others.
2011. “Bevacizumab in Combination with a Taxane for the
First-Line Treatment of HER2-Negative Metastatic Breast
Cancer.” Health Technology Assessment 15 (Suppl 1): 1–12.
doi:10.3310/Hta15suppl1/01.
Salomon, J. A., N. Carvalho, C. Gutierrez-Delgado, R. Orozco,
A. Mancuso, and others. 2012. “Intervention Strategies
to Reduce the Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases
in Mexico: Cost Effectiveness Analysis.” BMJ 344: E355.
doi:10.1136/Bmj.E355.
Sankaranarayanan, R., B. M. Nene, S. S. Shastri, K. Jayant,
R. Muwonge, and others. 2009. “HPV Screening for Cervical
Cancer in Rural India.” New England Journal of Medicine
360 (14): 1385–94. doi:10.1056/Nejmoa0808516.
Sankaranarayanan, R., K. Ramadas, H. Amarasinghe,
S. Subramanian, and N. Johnson. 2015. “Oral Cancer.”
In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer, edited by
H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton.
3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.

Seya, M. J., S. F. Gelders, O. U. Achara, B. Milani, and
W. K. Scholten. 2011. “A First Comparison between the
Consumption of and the Need for Opioid Analgesics at
Country, Regional, and Global Levels.” Journal of Pain &
Palliative Care Pharmacotherapy 25 (1): 6–18. doi:10.3109
/15360288.2010.536307.
Shisana, O., T. Rehle, J. Louw, N. Zungu-Dirwayi, P. Dana,
and others. 2006. “Public Perceptions on National Health
Insurance: Moving towards Universal Health Coverage in
South Africa.” South Africa Medical Journal 96 (9): 814–18.
Sloan, F. A., and H. Gelband. 2007. Cancer Control Opportunities
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Washington, DC:
National Academy Press.
Sullivan, T., R. Sullivan, and O. M. Ginsburg. 2015. “Screening
for Cancer: Considerations for LMICs.” In Disease Control
Priorities: Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington,
DC: World Bank.
Tappenden, P., R. Jones, S. Paisley, and C. Carroll. 2007.
“Systematic Review and Economic Evaluation of
Bevacizumab and Cetuximab for the Treatment of
Metastatic Colorectal Cancer.” Health Technology
Assessment 11 (12): 1–128: III–IV.
Termrungruanglert, W., P. Havanond, N. Khemapech,
S. Lertmaharit, S. Pongpanich, and others. 2012. “Model for
Predicting the Burden and Cost of Treatment in Cervical
Cancer and HPV-Related Diseases in Thailand.” European
Journal of Gynaecological Oncology 33 (4): 391–94.
Trimble, E. L., P. Rajaraman, A. Chao, T. Gross, C. Levin, and
others. 2015. “Cancer Research: The Need for National
Commitment.” In Disease Control Priorities: Volume 3,
Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. 3rd ed. Washington, DC: World Bank.
UICC (Union for International Cancer Control). Global Task
Force on Radiotherapy for Cancer Control. http://gtfrcc.org/.
UN (United Nations). 2015. Sustainable Development Goals.
http://sustainabledevelopment.un.org/?menu=1300.
UNPD (United Nations Population Division). 2012. World
Population Prospects: The 2012 Revision. New York: UNPD.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 2012. Prostate Cancer:
Screening, May 2012: Final Recommendation Statement.
http:// www.uspreventiveservicestaskforce.org/page
/document /recommendationstatementfinal/prostate
-cancer-screening.

Van Walbeek, C. 2005. “Tobacco Control in South Africa.”
Promotion and Education 12 (Suppl 4): 25–8. doi:10.1177/1
0253823050120040107.
Vanni, T., P. Mendes Luz, A. Foss, M. Mesa-Frias, and
R. Legood. 2012. “Economic Modelling Assessment of
the HPV Quadrivalent Vaccine in Brazil: A Dynamic
Individual-Based Approach.” Vaccine 30 (32): 4866–71.
doi:10.1016/J.Vaccine.2012.04.087.
Varmus, H., and E. L. Trimble. 2011. “Integrating Cancer
Control into Global Health.” Science Translational Medicine
3 (101): 101cm28. doi:10.1126/Scitranslmed.3002321.
Verguet, S., C. L. Gauvreau, S. Mishra, M. Maclennan,
S. M. Murphy, and others. 2015. “The Consequences
of Tobacco Tax on Household Health and Finances in
Rich and Poor Smokers in China: An Extended CostEffectiveness Analysis.” The Lancet Global Health 3 (4):
E206–16. doi:10.1016/S2214-109x(15)70095-1.
Verguet, S., R. Laxminarayan, and D. T. Jamison. 2015.
“Universal Public Finance of Tuberculosis Treatment in
India: An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.” Health
Economics 24 (3): 318–32. doi:10.1002/Hec.3019.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2000. The World Health
Report 2000: Health Systems: Improving Performance.
Geneva: WHO.
———. 2011a. Global Status Report on Non-Communicable
Diseases 2010. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2011b. Scaling Up Action against Non-Communicable
Diseases: How Much Will It Cost? Geneva: WHO.
———. 2011c.“Final Meeting Report and Recommendations.”
Immunization Practices Advisory Committee, WHO,
11–13 April. http://www.who.int/immunization/policy
/committees/ipac_2011_april_report.pdf?ua=1.
———. 2012. Global Health Estimates 2012. http://www.who
.int/healthinfo/global_burden_disease/en/.
———. 2013. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic
2013. Geneva: WHO.
World Bank. 2014a. Country and Lending Groups. http://data
.worldbank.org/about/country-and-lending-groups.
———. 2014b. World Bank Development Indicators 2014. Table
2.15, Health Systems. http://wdi.worldbank.org/table/2.15.
Zelle, S. G., K. M. Nyarko, W. K. Bosu, M. Aikins, L. M. Niens, and
others. 2012. “Costs, Effects and Cost-Effectiveness of Breast
Cancer Control in Ghana.” Tropical Medicine & International
Health 17 (8): 1031–43.doi:10.1111/J.1365-3156.2012.03021.X.

Summary

21

Chapter

2

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer:
Transitions in Human Development and
Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control
Freddie Bray and Isabelle Soerjomataram

INTRODUCTION
Changes in fertility and life expectancy are leading to
major changes in the structure of the global population and, in turn, in the scale of the cancer problem
worldwide and at every resource level (WHO 2011b). In
addition to the increasing burden of cancer is a changing
spectrum of common cancers that is in different regions
correlated with levels of human development (Bray and
others 2012). The ongoing cancer transition includes
a reduction in infection-related cancers (for example,
stomach and cervical cancer) that is offset by increases
in cancers linked to a Westernization of lifestyle (for
example, breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer). The
transition also encompasses changes in risk behavior,
including tobacco uptake, with a delayed but large
impact on the burden from lung and other tobaccorelated cancers (Bray and others 2012). The cancer
transition is not uniform, however: in Sub-Saharan
Africa, recent increases in cervical cancer are observed
in Uganda and Zimbabwe; in many countries, a residual burden of cancers associated with infectious agents
accompanies the increasing burden of cancers associated
with economic transition (Parkin and others 2014).
This chapter presents a global overview of the
cancer burden, patterns and profiles, recent trends in

common cancers, and the expected future scale of the
disease by 2030.
We link geographical and temporal patterns of cancer
to corresponding levels of economic progress to provide an overview of the key characteristics of the global
cancer transition. We use gross national income (GNI)
per capita as a national indicator of societal as well
as economic development (http://data.worldbank.org
/news/new-country-classifications), and corresponding
rates of cancer incidence and mortality as markers of the
extent of the global cancer transition. We draw attention
to geographical variations and trends in cancer-specific
rates according to differing economic profiles and in
each of the world’s regions. In addition, we provide
a global, trends-based projection of the likely cancer
burden in 2030, based on historical trends refined by
incorporating an indicator of level of development.
We also examine the number of potentially avoidable new cases and cancer deaths, assuming a reduction in risk factors (Hanley 2001). Even today, tobacco
smoking is by far the most important risk factor for
cancer (Lim and others 2012). Although the smoking
habit is in decline in many high-income countries
(HICs), tobacco consumption is still rising in many
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) (Thun
and others 2012). As part of the global socioeconomic

Corresponding author: Freddie Bray, Section of Cancer Surveillance, International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France, brayf@iarc.fr.

23

transition, many countries presently classified as
low- or middle-income are increasingly adopting
Westernized diets and more sedentary and less physically active lifestyles, leading to a rapid shift in the
profile of common cancers in these populations (Bray
and others 2012). In view of these developments, this
chapter also reviews the main causes of cancer, with an
emphasis on the sources of disparities that contribute
to an increasingly greater proportional burden from
cancer in LMICs, and the prospects for cancer control
in different settings.
We conclude by pointing to how the high-level political commitment to reduce the rising burden of cancer
and other noncommunicable diseases (NCDs) can
advance the measurement of cancer to inform cancer
control action. There remains an overwhelming need
to improve the quality and coverage of populationbased cancer registration in most LMICs, as an essential
component in planning and evaluating national cancer
control activities.
This chapter uses the World Health Organization’s
(WHO) geographical regions: Africa, the Americas,
South-East Asia, Europe, Eastern Mediterranean, and
Western Pacific.

Figure 2.1 Top 10 Causes of Death Worldwide, 2012
(millions of deaths)

Malignant neoplasms
Ischaemic heart
disease

CANCER IN CONTEXT: COMPARISONS WITH
OTHER NONCOMMUNICABLE DISEASES BY
DEVELOPMENT LEVEL
Worldwide, an estimated 38 million deaths—almost
two-thirds of the annual 56 million total deaths—are
caused by NCDs, principally from cardiovascular disease,
diabetes, chronic respiratory disease, and cancer (WHO
2011b). In 2012, nearly 80 percent of all NCD deaths
(28 million) occurred in LMICs; almost 30 percent of
deaths occurred before age 60 years in these countries.
Among NCDs, cancer is a leading cause of death
(figure 2.1).
This observation is consistent with the global socioeconomic transitions. Between 1990 and 2010, there
was a 17 percent reduction in communicable maternal and neonatal and nutritional deaths, offset by a
30 percent increase in NCD-related deaths (Lozano
and others 2012). This increase was greater in LMICs,
compared with HICs (39 percent versus 15 percent,
respectively). The shift is largely driven by population
growth and improved longevity. Although the number
of NCD-related deaths increased from 27 million to
34 million between 1990 and 2010, death rates declined
by 19 percent (646 to 520 per 100,000) over the same
period (Lozano and others 2012).
The overall statistics conceal variations among
countries. Cancer is an even larger component of the
NCD burden in HICs. In Japan, cancer represents over
half of all NCD deaths combined; in approximately
40 countries, age-adjusted cancer mortality rates are
equal to or above those of cardiovascular disease in premature mortality at ages under 70 years (WHO 2013).

Stroke

KEY INDICATORS OF THE GLOBAL CANCER
BURDEN

Lower respiratory
infections
HIV/AIDS
Diarrheal diseases
Preterm birth
complications
Road injury
Chronic obstructive
pulmonary disease
Cirrhosis of the liver
0

1
2
3
4
Estimated number of deaths for men and
women, ages 0–69 years (millions)

Source: Global Health Observatory, WHO 2013.

24

Cancer

Comparisons of incidence rates can be used to investigate cancer risk factors, aid planning and prioritizing of
cancer control resources, as well as facilitate monitoring
and evaluating of the impact of specific primary prevention interventions. Mortality has often been considered
the best means of evaluating overall success in reducing
the cancer burden. An assessment of cancer-specific
mortality rates is particularly useful in evaluating the
effectiveness of secondary prevention, particularly where
the goal is early detection of malignant tumors; it is also
useful in tertiary prevention in determining the impact
of cancer management and treatment. Combined successes in cancer prevention, early detection, screening,
and treatment have resulted in a reduction in overall cancer mortality rates in some more developed

countries, predominantly as a result of declines in the
incidence and/or mortality from a number of specific
types of common cancer (Doll 1990, Karim-Kos and
others 2008). The broad spectrum of interventions and
their tendency to produce real or artifactual changes in
cancer incidence, mortality, or survival, however, lends
support to combining analyses of all three measures.
Cancer is complex to monitor accurately because of
its biological diversity; the underlying coding and classification issues are considerably more intricate than the
other NCD categories. There has been a long history of
cancer registration in many areas of the world, however,
and a tradition of maintaining comparable accurate and
complete global cancer incidence data that spans half
a century. The serial publication, Cancer Incidence in
Five Continents (CI5, http://ci5.iarc.fr), published by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
and the International Association of Cancer Registries,
is regarded as the definitive source of local cancer data.
The 10th volume of CI5, published in 2013, compiles
incidence data from high-quality population-based
cancer registries (PBCRs) for 2003–07.
The IARC is also the key reference source for statistics
on the global, regional, and national burden of cancer;
it publishes estimates of the core indicators for cancer
at the country level as part of the GLOBOCAN series
(http://globocan.iarc.fr). The most recent database contains estimates of the cancer incidence, mortality, prevalence, and disability-adjusted life years for all cancers
combined for 2012, as well as for 27 cancer sites in
184 countries and 20 regions (Ferlay and others 2013).
The methods used to compile the GLOBOCAN
estimates have evolved, but the underlying principle
remains the use of the best available observed data
within a country to build up the global picture. Details
are provided by Ferlay and others (2015). Estimation
of cancer-specific incidence and mortality rates are
dependent on local data sources, and the cancer
registry data from CI5 provide a key input into the
compilation. Unfortunately, there remains a paucity
of high-quality cancer incidence and mortality data in
low-resource and medium-resource areas, and hence
the accuracy of the estimates from these regions is
generally lower; an alphanumeric scoring system has
been introduced to provide a broad indication of
the robustness of the estimation within each country
(Ferlay and others 2015).
The definitions, sources, and mode of estimation
of the key indicators used in this chapter are provided.
Counts and rates of cancer incidence and mortality
are presented; rates per 100,000 were age-standardized
using the world standard population (Doll, Payne, and
Waterhouse 1966).

Incidence
Cancer incidence is defined as the frequency of occurrence of new cases of cancer in a specific population
over a given period of time. It can be expressed as the
absolute number of cases or as a rate per unit-time, with
new cancer cases the numerator and the corresponding
person-time at risk the denominator.
PBCRs are the essential institutions enabling these
activities (Bray 2014; Parkin 2006). They collect and
classify information on all new cases of cancer within
a well-defined population and provide statistics on
occurrence for the purposes of assessing and controlling
the impact of cancer in the community. Registries are
either national or regional in their coverage, with a high
degree of completeness, accuracy, and comparability of
the collected data essential for making reliable inferences regarding geographical and temporal variations
in the underlying rates. Although incidence trends are
unaffected by the impact of changes in treatment and
consequently survival, changes in registration practices, definitions of malignancy, and the International
Classification of Diseases can all impact recorded
incidence (Muir, Fraumeni, and Doll 1994). Inclusion
in CI5 is a reliable marker of the quality of a given
registry’s data, in that the editorial process includes
numerous assessments of the quality of the submitted
data set. A substantial disparity exists in the availability
of high-quality cancer registration data between HICs
and LMICs. While 99 percent of the North American
population is covered in the 10th volume of CI5, only
7 percent, 5 percent, and 2 percent of the respective
South American, Asian, and African countries have
registries that were accepted for inclusion.
Mortality
Mortality provides a unique measure of the outcome
or impact of cancer and is expressed as either the number of deaths occurring or a mortality rate per unittime. Mortality is a product of the incidence and the
case-fatality of a given cancer, and fatality (1-survival)
represents the probability that an individual with cancer
will die from it. Mortality rates then measure average risk
to the population of dying from a specific cancer. If case
fatality is constant across populations or in a specified
population over time, geographic or temporal comparisons of incidence can be inferred from mortality. It is
evident, however, most notably in HICs and for cancers
where treatment and cancer management have markedly
improved, that incidence and mortality trends can be at
considerable variance.
Data derive from vital registration systems, where
usually a clinical practitioner certifies the fact and cause

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

25

of death. The International Classification of Diseases
provides the uniform system for nomenclature and
coding and a suggested format for the death certificate. Mortality data are affected by the accuracy of
the recorded cause of death and the completeness of
registration. Errors of death certification are well documented (Doll and Peto 1981); patients diagnosed with
cancer, for example, may die of the disease without this
being written on the death certificate, and such inaccuracies are known to vary considerably between countries
and over time.
The WHO mortality databank hosted at IARC
(http://www-dep.iarc.fr/WHOdb/WHOdb.htm) contains national cancer mortality data on more than
80 countries; for many, the data cover decades. The
greater availability by country and over time is confined
mainly to higher-income countries; at least 15 years of
data are available for 78 countries (35 in Europe, 25 in
the Americas, 15 in Asia, 2 in Oceania, and 1 in Africa),
but may explain its usage as a surrogate for incidence
in geographic and temporal studies of cancer. In South
America, mortality data are more comprehensive than
incidence data, while both incidence and mortality
are limited in Asia and Africa. In such settings, where
deaths are often not attended by physicians, alternative
methods, such as verbal autopsy, may be used to complement data collected from death certificates.

Income as a Proxy for Human Development
The remainder of this section examines cancer profiles
with respect to the current burden, recent changes,
and the future burden at the global, regional, and
national levels. It is important to understand these patterns and trends in relation to the rapid increments in
human development over recent decades. Tracking these
changes helps to clarify how demographic and epidemiologic transitions impact the overall burden and the
changing distribution of common cancers in different
populations. In keeping with previous DCP volumes,
we utilized national income level (GNI per capita) as a
proxy for human development (UNDP 2009).
In examining aspects of the cancer burden according
to resource levels, we used predefined categories of the
distribution according to the World Bank classification
of countries by income-group (see endnote for per
capita income cut-offs). The estimated burden of cancer
in 2030 is presented by gender for all cancers combined
for all levels of income on the basis of the rates in 2008,
assuming population growth and aging in 2030 occur
according to the United Nations World Population
Prospects medium-fertility variant.

26

Cancer

Proportion of the Burden Attributable to Risk Factors
The population attributable fraction (PAF) (Hanley
2001) is a standard measure used to quantify the proportion of disease burden attributable to a risk factor.
It is calculated using information on the prevalence of a
risk factor in a population and the relative risk that the
risk factor poses for development of disease, compared
with those where the risk factor is absent. The derived
proportion is indicative of the reduction in cancer incidence or mortality that would be expected if exposure
to the risk factor were absent. For risk factors where
zero exposure is inapplicable, such as for body weight,
PAF is calculated by comparing population exposure to
reported exposures at the lowest level of cancer risk.
The results presented in this chapter are largely based
on a systematic search of published and unpublished
reviews from major databases, censuses, health and
nutrition surveys, and epidemiological studies (Lim and
others 2012). Wherever possible, the data are supplemented by national, regional, or global studies with a
focus on cancer (Agudo and others 2012; Boffetta and
others 2006; Boffetta and others 2009; de Martel and
others 2012; Ezzati and others 2005; Forman and others
2012; Goldie and others 2008; Goldstein and others
2005; McCormack and others 2012; McCormack and
Schuz 2012; Renehan and others 2010). Because of the
known lag time between the inception of smoking and
cancer development, lung cancer mortality rates were
converted into smoking impact ratios and as a proxy for
exposure to smoking, thereby taking into account the
duration and intensity of the exposure. To calculate PAF
linked to infection, the prevalence of infection among
cancer cases was used instead of the prevalence of infection in the population, because of the unreliability of
population surveys on infection prevalence (de Martel
and others 2012). As for effect sizes relating exposure to
disease, wherever possible, the results were as reported in
meta-analysis or were derived from the most up-to-date
epidemiological findings.
The quality of the estimation depends largely on
data availability, and a large gap remains in data availability and data quality in LMICs relative to HICs. The
estimation of PAF also assumes that the association
between a risk factor and cancer is causal and that a
reduction in exposure to a specific risk factor will lead
to a decline in the incidence of the cancer in question
(Rockhill, Newman, and Weinberg 1998). To avoid an
overestimation of the role of certain risk factors, we only
report results for factors that have been confirmed as
having sufficient evidence in causing cancer (Cogliano
and others 2011). Epidemiological studies that report
risk associations between exposure and cancer are prone

to several limitations. In estimating PAF, studies have
tried to overcome this issue by exclusively using risk
estimates based on large meta-analyses that included
only high-quality studies and, wherever possible, only
cohort studies.

GLOBAL CANCER BURDEN AND
DISTRIBUTION ACCORDING TO INCOME
GROUP
For 2012, GLOBOCAN estimates indicate that there were
9.1 million new cases of cancer and 4.4 million cancer
deaths between the ages of 0 and 69 years (figure 2.2).
Female breast cancer is the most frequently diagnosed
cancer globally (1.3 million new cases, 14.7 percent of
all cancer cases), but it ranks third as the most common
cause of cancer death (358,000 deaths, 8.2 percent of
all cancer deaths). Lung cancer is the leading cause of
death (767,000 deaths, 17.5 percent) and ranks second
in incidence (1 million deaths, 10.8 percent). In terms
of incidence, the most frequent cancer types thereafter
are colorectal (744,000 cases, 174,000 deaths), prostate
(556,000 cases, 56,000 deaths), stomach (539,000 cases,
242,000 deaths), and liver (503,000 cases, 336,000 deaths).

Four cancers constitute nearly 50 percent of the
total cancer burden in HICs; for cancers of the prostate,
lung, and colorectum, comparable numbers (between
350,000 and 400,000 new cases) of each type are estimated in 2012, with female breast cancer accounting
for 550,000 cases (figure 2.3). Female breast cancer is
also the most common form of cancer in LMICs, with
almost 770,000 estimated cases in 2012. In combination, eight cancers (breast, lung, liver, cervix, stomach,
colorectum, esophagus, and leukemia) account for
almost two-thirds of the estimated cancer burden in
LMICs. It is noteworthy that several types of cancer,
more commonly associated with infection and poverty,
less commonly diagnosed in HICs, are major cancers in
LMICs; they include stomach and liver cancer—which
are more frequently diagnosed than colorectal or prostate cancer in lower-income economies—as well as
cancers of the cervix and esophagus.
In terms of risk of developing specific neoplasms
worldwide, the lifetime incidence of breast cancer is
highest (2.8 percent), with the lifetime risk of the
next four most common cancers varying from 1 to
1.5 percent. In HICs, however, the lifetime risk exceeds
2 percent for cancers of the breast (female), prostate,
lung, and colorectum.

Figure 2.2 Global Burden of Cancer: Estimated Counts of Cancer Incidence and Mortality, by Region, 2012
b. Mortality

a. Incidence
Middle East and
North Africa
Sub-Saharan Africa
3.5%
5.9%

Middle East and
North Africa
3.8% Sub-Saharan Africa
7.9%

Europe and
Central Asia
23.9%

South Asia
12.3%

Latin America
and the Caribbean
7.9%

Latin America
and the Caribbean
7.3%
North America
6.9%

North America
12.1%

East Asia and Pacific
34.4%

Europe and
Central Asia
20.0%

South Asia
16.1%

East Asia and Pacific
38.1%

4,375,000
Deaths
9,070,000
New cases
Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: Data are for men and women ages 0–69 years.

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

27

Figure 2.3 Global Burden of Cancer: Cancer Incidence and Mortality by Income Level, 2012

a. Incidence

New cases in 2012,
0–69 years (thousands)

800

600

400

200

a
lym

Th

ph

yro

om

id

s
ha
op

No

n−

Ho

dg

Ce

kin

Es

rvi

x,

ut

er

Liv

gu

us

er

h
om

Co

Pr

St

ta
os

ec
lor

ac

te

m
tu

ng
Lu

Br

ea

st

0

Deaths in 2012,
0–69 years (thousands)

b. Mortality

400

200

m
sy
ste

as

rvo
us

Pa

nc
re

ia
ka
em

ut
x,
rvi

Br

ain
,

ne

Ce

Le
u

er

us

gu
s
op
ha
Es

ec
tu
m
Co

lor

ac
h
St

om

t
ea
s
Br

Liv
er

Lu

ng

0

Low and middle income

High income

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: Values are age-standardized rates for the world population structure.

In terms of mortality, the most frequent causes of
cancer death in HICs are lung, colorectum, female
breast, and pancreas, which together account for
about 48 percent of the total cancer deaths in 2012.
Relative to incidence, a greater proportion of the

28

Cancer

mortality burden occurs in LMICs, particularly for
those cancers more frequently diagnosed in LMICs,
including liver and stomach (figure 2.3). Together
with lung, female breast, and colorectal cancer, these
neoplasms constitute half of the total cancer mortality

burden in these areas. In terms of risk of death, the
lifetime cumulative mortality from lung cancer and
female breast cancer ranks highest in HICs (1.8
and 1.2 percent, respectively) and LMICs (1.3 and
1 percent, respectively). Colorectal cancer ranks third
in HICs, and liver and cervical cancer rank third and
fourth, respectively, in LMICs.

DIVERSITY OF CANCER BY TYPE:
GEOGRAPHICAL VARIATIONS BY REGION
The classification of cancer patterns by broad levels of
economic development draws attention to some of the
key macroeconomic determinants of inequality and
the variations in the risk of developing cancer globally.
To underscore the diversity of cancer, it is important to
show the extent to which cancer-specific patterns vary.
Map 2.1, panel a, outlines the most common form of
cancer among men in 184 countries in 2012. Worldwide,
10 types of cancer rank highest, with prostate cancer
the most frequent cancer form in 68 countries, chiefly
in HICs, but also in parts of Latin America and the
Caribbean and in the southern regions of the African
continent. Lung cancer is the most common neoplasm
in 42 countries, mainly in Eastern Europe, Northern
Africa, and Asia, including China and Indonesia. Liver
cancer is the most common form in 27 countries, particularly in Western Africa and South-East Asia.
Among men, the incidence and mortality patterns
vary most markedly by region in Africa (Jemal and
others 2012), with liver cancer the most common cancer
in 18 of the 47 Sub-Saharan African countries. Clusters
of very high incidence of Kaposi sarcoma are observed
in 13 countries in Eastern Africa; prostate cancer is
the most frequently observed tumor in nine countries
(Parkin and others 2014). In women—and in some
contrast to the diversity of the highest ranking cancers
in men—either breast cancer (143 countries) or cervical
cancer (39 countries) ranks as the most frequent cancer
diagnosed in almost all countries worldwide; exceptions
include the very high female incidence rates of thyroid
cancer in the Republic of Korea and liver cancer in
Mongolia (map 2.1, panel b).

GLOBAL CANCER TRANSITIONS: RECENT
TRENDS AND FUTURE BURDEN CIRCA 2030
The high-quality cancer registry data from CI5 (http://
ci5.iarc.fr) illustrate temporal aspects of the global
cancer transition: increases in breast and prostate
cancer are apparent in countries that have transitioned
from low-income to middle-income or middle-income

to high-income (figures 2.4 and 2.5); for colorectal
cancer, the increases are more evident in registries
transitioning from middle-income countries; those
countries that have reached very high levels of income
tend to have also attained very high incidence rates of
this cancer, and a recent peak in incidence is observed
in several countries (figure 2.6). Nevertheless, the
trends point to a Westernization effect in countries
undergoing transition. Increasing average levels of
economic progress serve as a proxy for a changing
population prevalence of reproductive, dietary, metabolic, and hormonal risk factors (toward levels more
akin to those more commonly observed in the West)
that correspondingly increase the risk of these cancers
(Bray 2014).
Evidently, better diagnosis, earlier detection, and
screening may have inflated the incidence burden in many
settings, particularly where precursor lesions are not the
target of the intervention. This includes prostate and
breast cancers where prostate-specific antigen testing and
mammographic screening have impacted the increasing
incidence of the respective cancers in many populations
(Bleyer and Welch 2012; Bray and others 2010; Bray,
McCarron, and Parkin 2004). Nevertheless, such increases
are countered by another hallmark of cancer transition:
a reduction in infection-based neoplasms (Forman and
others 2012; Vaccarella and others 2013). Most of the
registries record declines in cervical and stomach cancer
incidence (Bray and others 2012) (figures 2.7 and 2.8).
There have been rapid increases in the incidence of
breast, prostate, and colorectal cancer documented in
countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with good quality incidence data; for example, rates of breast cancer have
increased by 3.6 percent annually in Kampala, Uganda,
and by 4.9 percent in the black population of Harare,
Zimbabwe. There is little evidence of another hallmark
of cancer transition—declining cervical cancer—in these
populations: rather, rates exhibit persistent increases in
incidence in recent years (Chokunonga and others 2013;
Wabinga and others 2014).
The importance of lung cancer in the overall
global burden from cancer is a reflection of the prevalence of tobacco smoking. The differences in lung
cancer incidence by national income level reflect the
historical and current variations of smoking habits
in the underlying populations. Lung cancer rates
are decreasing in men in most countries, notably in
HICs and in countries where the habit has long been
established, but they are increasing in women (Jemal
and others 2010). Such contrasting male and female
trends are consistent with the population-specific rise
and fall in adult cigarette utilization over past decades
(Lortet-Tieulent and others 2013). The correlation

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

29

Map 2.1 Most Common Cancers Diagnosed in Men and Women in 184 Countries, 2012, Ages 0–69 Years
a. Most common cancers among men, 2012

Site (number of countries)
Prostate (68)
Lung (42)
Liver (27)
Kaposi Sarcoma (13)
Colorectal (11)
Stomach (11)
Lip, Oral cavity (5)
Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma (3)
Leukemia (2)
Esophagus (2)

b. Most common cancers among women, 2012

Site (number of countries)
Breast (143)
Cervix Uterine (39)
Liver (1)
Thyroid (1)

Source: Ferlay and others, 2013.

between income and male smoking prevalence has
shown a curvilinear trend (Talley 2010) that mimics
the smoking epidemic curve (Thun and others 2012).
Smoking prevalence tends to be low in countries of
low average income but rises as income increases,
until it stabilizes and begins to decline as countries
attain high mean income levels.
The prevalence of smoking in men has increased
sharply in many middle-income countries, including

30

Cancer

China and Indonesia (Jha 2009). The future burden
of lung cancer and other smoking-related cancers
(IARC 2004), such as bladder, esophageal, and oral
cavity in different regions and countries, will largely
depend on gender-specific smoking patterns at the
population level, including the duration of smoking,
extent of cessation, and types of tobacco smoked
(Doll and others 2004; Pirie and others 2013; Thun
and others 2012).

Figure 2.4 Trends in Age-Standardized (World) Incidence Rates of Female Breast Cancer, by Income Level, 1980–2010

b. High-income countries

80

80

70

70

60

60

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and middle-income countries

50

40

30

25

20

15

50

40

30

25

20

15

13

13
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Calendar year

1990

2000

2010

Calendar year

Philippinesa

Colombiaa

Chinaa

Australia

Costa Rica

Indiaa

Ugandaa

Norway

United Kingdom,
England
Czech Republic

Israel
Japana

Source: CI5plus, http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx.
Note: Estimated from selected population-based cancer registries of consistently high quality (included in successive volumes of Cancer Incidence in Five Continents). Data for the economies in
the graphs are for China (Hong Kong SAR, China; and Shanghai), Colombia (Cali), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Japan (Miyagi, Nagasaki, and Osaka), the Philippines (Manila), and Uganda
(Kampala).
a. Denotes rates based on an aggregate of one or more regional registries, as indicated.

A recent study of incidence trends in 1988–2002 for
the seven most frequently diagnosed cancers worldwide
(constituting more than 58 percent of the global burden) estimated the annual percentage change of trends
in age-adjusted incidence using data from 101 cancer
registries (Bray and others 2012). The trends were stratified by medium, high, or very high levels of the Human
Development Index (HDI), a composite measure of life
expectancy at birth, income as GNI per capita, and access

to education. Although the HDI is highly correlated with
GNI, the latter reflects average national income, whereas
the former additionally provides some indication as to
how income is spent, at least in the areas of health and
education (UNDP 2009).
An estimated 21.6 million new cancer cases are predicted for 2030 (an increase of 53 percent from 2012),
based solely on projected demographic changes and
unchanged cancer incidence rates (figure 2.9). If the

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

31

Figure 2.5 Trends in Age-Standardized (World) Incidence Rates of Prostate Cancer, by Income Level, 1980–2010
b. High-income countries

80

80

60

60

50

50
Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and middle-income countries

30

20
15

10

5

2

30

20
15

10

5

2
1.5

1.5

1

1
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Calendar year
a

1990

2000

2010

Calendar year
a

Colombia

Costa Rica

Philippines

Ugandaa

Indiaa

Chinaa

Norway

Australia

Czech Republic

Israel

United Kingdom,
England
Japana

Source: CI5plus, http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx.
Note: Estimated from selected population-based cancer registries of consistently high quality (included in successive volumes of Cancer Incidence in Five Continents). Data for the economies in
the graphs are for China (Hong Kong SAR, China; and Shanghai), Colombia (Cali), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Japan (Miyagi, Nagasaki, and Osaka), the Philippines (Manila), and Uganda
(Kampala).
a. Rates based on an aggregate of one or more regional registries, as indicated.

cancer-specific incidence trends up to 2002 continue, an
absolute increase of 62 percent in incidence is expected,
representing an overall increase of 1.2 million new cases
per year in 2012–30. The increases in cancer incidence
are proportionally greatest in low HDI settings, with a
predicted 77 percent increase in both genders.
Although such analyses appear to present a rather
pessimistic view of the future burden of cancer, targeted
interventions can significantly reduce the projected rise

32

Cancer

in the number of cancer patients through resourceappropriate interventions. Such actions include primary prevention strategies to control lifestyle factors,
including tobacco avoidance and cessation foremost,
a reduction in alcohol consumption and obesity, and
the promotion of increased levels of physical activity.
Vaccination programs for liver and cervical cancer and
early detection programs for breast and cervical cancer
are important.

Figure 2.6 Trends in Age-Standardized (World) Incidence Rates of Male Colorectal Cancer, by Income Level, 1980–2010
b. High-income countries

40

40

30

30
Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and middle-income countries

25

20

15

10

7

25

20

15

10

7

5

5

4

4
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Calendar year
a

1990

2000

2010

Calendar year
a

a

China

Philippines

Colombia

Australia

Czech Republic

Norway

Costa Rica

Ugandaa

Indiaa

Israel

United Kingdom,
England

Japana

Source: CI5plus, http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx.
Note: Estimated from selected population-based cancer registries of consistently high quality (included in successive volumes of Cancer Incidence in Five Continents). Data for the economies in
the graphs are for China (Hong Kong SAR, China; and Shanghai), Colombia (Cali), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Japan (Miyagi, Nagasaki, and Osaka), the Philippines (Manila), and Uganda
(Kampala).
a. Rates based on an aggregate of one or more regional registries, as indicated.

RISK FACTORS, INTERVENTIONS AND
POLICIES, AND POTENTIAL IMPACTS ON THE
BURDEN OF CANCER
Approximately 30 percent of all cancers worldwide
are considered preventable by modification of the
predominant risk factors (Danaei and others 2005;
Martin-Moreno, Soerjomataram, and Magnusson 2008).

Smoking and dietary risk factors have particularly
important roles in potentially reducing the cancer burden in HICs and LMICs (Ezzati and others 2005; Jha
2009; Lim and others 2012; WCRF and AICR 2007).
For cancers with strong risk modifiers, trends in risk
factors are followed by trends of cancer incidence with
a lag of 20–30 years (Doll and others 2004; Jha 2009).
Illustrative examples include the temporal patterns of

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

33

Figure 2.7 Trends in Age-Standardized (World) Incidence Rates of Cervical Cancer, by Income Level, 1980–2010
b. High-income countries

50

50

40

40
Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and middle-income countries

30
25
20

15

10

7
6

30
25
20

15

10

7
6

5

5

4

4

3.5

3.5
1980

1990

2000

2010

Calendar year

1980

1990

2000

2010

Calendar year

Ugandaa

Colombiaa

Indiaa

Czech Republic

Norway

Japana

Philippinesa

Costa Rica

Chinaa

United Kingdom,
England

Australia

Israel

Source: CI5plus, http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx.
Note: Estimated from selected population-based cancer registries of consistently high quality (included in successive volumes of Cancer Incidence in Five Continents). Data for the economies in
the graphs are for China (Hong Kong SAR, China; and Shanghai), Colombia (Cali), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Japan (Miyagi, Nagasaki, and Osaka), the Philippines (Manila), and Uganda
(Kampala).
a. Rates based on an aggregate of one or more regional registries, as indicated.

cigarette smoking and lung cancer, and age at first childbirth and breast cancer (Jha 2009; Soerjomataram and
others 2008). Unfortunately, for most risk factors, the
relation to specific cancer forms is weaker than these
associations. In addition, risk factors often interact, making it difficult to link directly the changing prevalence
of a single risk factor to the observed trends of specific
cancer types.

34

Cancer

Tobacco
Tobacco smoking is the largest single avoidable cause
of premature death. Worldwide, 70 percent of lung
cancer deaths; 42 percent of cancers of the esophagus
and oral cavity (Ezzati and others 2005; Lim and others
2012); a significant proportion of cancers of the larynx,
urinary bladder, and pancreas; a smaller proportion of
cancers of the kidney, stomach, and cervix; and myeloid

Figure 2.8 Trends in Age-Standardized (World) Incidence Rates of Men with Stomach Cancer, by Income Level, 1980–2010

b. High-income countries

50

50

40

40
Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and middle-income countries

30
25
20

15

10

7
6
5
4

30
25
20

15

10

7
6
5
4

3

3

2.5

2.5
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Calendar year
Costa Rica
Philippinesa

China
Indiaa

a

1990

2000

2010

Calendar year
a

Colombia
Ugandaa

a

Japan

Czech Republic

United Kingdom,
England

Norway

Israel

Australia

Source: CI5plus, http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx.
Note: Estimated from selected population-based cancer registries of consistently high quality (included in successive volumes of Cancer Incidence in Five Continents). Data for the economies in
the graphs are for China (Hong Kong SAR, China; and Shanghai), Colombia (Cali), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Japan (Miyagi, Nagasaki, and Osaka), the Philippines (Manila), and Uganda
(Kampala).
a. Rates based on an aggregate of one or more regional registries, as indicated.

leukemia are attributable to cigarette smoking (Agudo
and others 2012). Between 1990 and 2010, mortality rates from cancers related to smoking in higher
resource settings decreased (Lim and others 2012),
reflecting a mean decrease of smoking prevalence, especially among men. However, in countries undergoing
transition, the proportion of cancer deaths attributable to smoking has increased from 12 to 14 percent
(Lim and others 2012), reflecting increasing cigarette
consumption (Ng and others 2014). Efforts to reduce

tobacco consumption are central to preventing deaths
from cancer and other diseases.
Smoking prevalence has decreased for many decades
in HICs; in LMICs, it is stable or showing only limited signs of a decline very recently. In China, for
example, with one of the highest smoking rates in the
world, prevalence among men dropped from 57 to
53 percent between 2002 and 2007 (Ng and others 2014).
This change may represent the first impact of increasing
tobacco control measures in the country. The WHO

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

35

Figure 2.9 Cancer Incidence Projected to 2030 with and without
Incorporating Recent Changes in Rates by Gender, Income Level,
and Age Group
a. Younger than 65 years

Males

Low income
Medium income
High income
World

Females

Low income
Medium income
High income
World
0

1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 8,000
Incidence (thousands)
b. Age 65 years or older

Males

Low income
Medium income
High income
World

Females

Low income
Medium income
High income
World
0

1,000 2,000 3,000 4,000 5,000 6,000 7,000 8,000
Incidence (thousands)
Incidence 2012

Incidence 2030 (+ postulated
changes in trends)
Incidence 2030 (demographics)
Source: Bray and others 2012.

MPOWER report on the global tobacco epidemic indicated that, of the 48 countries that had implemented at
least one tobacco control measure since 2007, four-fifths
were LMICs (WHO 2008). The impact of such measures will not be evident in lung cancer trends for some
decades, and increasing rates may continue to rise in
many LMICs (McCormack and Boffetta 2011). The prevalence of women in LMICs who smoke has remained
rather low, but it may be expected to rise as social and
cultural prohibitions erode (Thun and others 2012). It is

36

Cancer

debatable whether the impact of tobacco on the cancer
burden in some LMICs will reach the level observed in
many HICs (McCormack and Boffetta 2011).
Persistent Infections
The most recent estimates state that at least 16.1 percent
or two million new cases of human malignancies
worldwide are attributable to persistent infections with
bacteria, viruses, or parasites (de Martel and others 2012).
This fraction is higher in LMICs (22.9 percent or 1.6
million new cases) than in HICs (7.4 percent or 410,000
new cases). Helicobacter pylori, hepatitis B and C viruses,
and human papilloma viruses (HPVs) are responsible
for 1.9 million cases, mainly gastric, liver, and cervical
cancers. The remaining 163,000 cases are attributed to
Epstein-Barr virus, human herpes virus type 8, human
T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1, Opisthorchis viverrini,
Clonorchis sinensis, and Schistosoma haematobium. By
region, the attributable fraction shows marked variation (figure 2.10), from 33.2 percent of all cancers in
Sub-Saharan Africa to 3.3 percent in Australia and New
Zealand. The proportion of cancers associated with
chronic infections ranges from 1 in 3 in Sub-Saharan
Africa and 1 in 4 in China to 1 in 30 in Australia and New
Zealand and 1 in 25 in North America. Awareness of the
role of infectious agents in cancer has expanded rapidly,
leading to the formulation of new strategies, including
vaccines against hepatitis B to prevent liver cancer, and
against high-risk strains of HPV to prevent cervical and
other HPV-related cancer types (Beutels 2001; Harper
and others 2004; Herrero and others 2013).
Increasing coverage of hepatitis B virus vaccination has been related to a decrease in the prevalence
of chronic hepatitis B virus throughout the world
(Goldstein and others 2005). For example, in Taiwan,
China, a 75 percent decrease in the incidence of hepatocellular carcinoma in children was reported since
the initiation of routine infant hepatitis B vaccination
(Chang and others 1997). Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance,
has subsidized vaccines in poor countries, leading to a
rapid increase in coverage of hepatitis B vaccination,
with a similar effort underway in implementing HPV
vaccination (Kane and others 2012). Based on current
epidemiologic data in 72 countries, it is predicted that
we will observe a mean reduction in lifetime risk of
cervical cancer of between 31 percent (for example,
in Guinea and Senegal) and 60 percent (for example,
in Ethiopia), assuming an increase in vaccination
coverage to 70 percent (Goldie and others 2008).
Differences in the results of vaccination stem from
variation in risk factor prevalence and the background
incidence of the cancer being targeted. Safe and

effective vaccines have proven highly important in
reducing infection-related cancers.
Alcohol
Excess alcohol consumption is an important risk factor
for several cancers, most notably, of the oral cavity,
pharynx, larynx, and esophagus, as well as for cancers
of the breast, liver, and colorectum (IARC 2010). Up to
4 percent of cancer cases worldwide are attributable to
alcohol intake (Boffetta and others 2006), with similar
distributions in HICs and LMICs (Rehm and Shield
2013). Global alcohol consumption has been stable in
recent decades, with a small decrease in countries where
intake was historically high (for example, in Europe) and
a small increase in countries where intake has been relatively low (for example, in South-East Asia) (Shield and
others 2013). In HICs, a notable exception is an increase
in consumption in the Russian Federation between 1986
and 2000, which has subsequently stabilized. Among
LMICs, Uganda has the heaviest alcohol intake level
(10.9 liters of pure alcohol per capita, compared with
11.3 in the Russian Federation) (WHO 2011a). This is
in contrast to traditionally Muslim countries (for example, the Arab Republic of Egypt and Indonesia), where
alcohol consumption is very low (0.66 and 0.67 liters
of pure alcohol per capita, respectively) (WHO 2011a).
Sweden is one example of a successful government policy geared toward effectively reducing alcohol intake at
the population level. After restricting beer sales based
on alcohol content in 1977, consumption decreased by
approximately 15 percent (Makela, Tryggvesson, and
Rossow 2002). Such an example points to the importance of nationwide population interventions as an
effective way to reduce alcohol consumption.
Diet
Recent estimates report that about 15 percent of all
cancer deaths are related to unhealthy diets, including
high intake of red meat, processed meat, and sodium,
as well as low intake of fruits and vegetables (Lim and
others 2012). Yet, most research is still inconclusive about
specific dietary items (WCRF and AICR 2007). The most
recent comprehensive review of diet and cancer risks
confirms an elevated risk related to red and processed
meat but finds less evidence supporting the benefit of
the consumption of fruits and vegetables in reducing
risk (WCRF and AICR 2007). Variations in the strength
of the evidence in different studies over time make the
measurement of dietary intake problematic in epidemiological studies; if only well-established risk factors are
included in the estimation, approximately 5 percent of

Figure 2.10 Cancer and Infection: Estimated Attributable Fraction, by
Region or Country, 2008
Sub-Saharan Africa
China
Other Eastern Asia
India
Japan
Other Oceania
South America
Other Central Asia
North Africa and Western Asia
Europe
North America
Australia and New Zealand
0

5

10 15 20 25 30
Attributable fraction (%)

35

Source: de Martel and others 2012.
Note: Values are for all cancers combined, for all ages.

cancer deaths worldwide (387,000) would be attributable
to dietary risk factors (Lim and others 2012).
Consumption of red meat and processed meat
increases the risk of colorectal cancer by an estimated
43 percent (WCRF and AICR 2007). Consumption of
red meat and processed meat is generally rising in LMICs
but is stable in HICs. Another major dietary risk factor
is high salt intake, which increases the risk of stomach
cancer. Globally, salt intake has declined, and the associated cancer burden has declined as a result (Brown
and others 2009); currently, 1.5 percent and 2 percent
of all cancer deaths in HICs and LMICs, respectively, are
attributed to high salt intake, compared with 2.2 percent
and 2.7 percent, respectively, in 1990 (Lim and others
2012). In the United Kingdom, 10 percent of new
stomach cancer cases diagnosed in 2010 may be attributable to high salt intake (Parkin 2011).
Although many of the underlying mechanisms are
not yet established, food and diet are clearly important
determinants of cancer risk. Over the past century, better
food preservation methods, reducing the need for salt,
have probably been a key factor in the decline in stomach
cancer incidence. The levels of red meat consumption
in recent decades may explain the low colorectal cancer
rates in southern Asia (WCRF and AICR 2007), as well
as the high rates in many western European countries
(Center, Jemal, and Ward 2009; Center and others 2009).
Evidence linking obesity and overweight to cancer is
firmer than the dietary evidence, indicating that 3 and
6 percent of cancer deaths in LMICs and HICs, respectively, can be attributed to excess weight, as quantified by
the body mass index (BMI) (Bergstrom and others 2001;
Lim and others 2012; Renehan and others 2010). BMI
is already an important correlate of cancer incidence in

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

37

HICs, and it is likely to continue increasing in importance
in some LMICs, as average BMI has increased in most
Central and South American countries and also in southern Africa (Stevens and others 2012). BMI has remained
low in Sub-Saharan Africa (except in southern Africa)
and South and Southeast Asia. High BMI has increased as
a cause of cancer deaths more substantively in LMICs, a
54 percent increase over the past 30 years, compared with
a 26 percent increase in HICs over the same period (Lim
and others 2012; Stevens and others 2012).
Physical Inactivity
Regular physical activity is associated with a reduction in the risk of developing colon cancer (Harriss
and others 2009) and breast cancer (Monninkhof
and others 2007). Many studies have suggested that
regular physical activity additionally reduces the risk
of cancers of the endometrium and prostate (WCRF
and AICR 2007). Although this effect seems to be
strongly linked to the impact of physical activity on
body weight, the preventive effect of regular exercise
for some cancers seems to act independently of weight
control (Friedenreich and others 2006; Giovannucci
and others 1995; Pischon and others 2006). In 2010,
global physical inactivity was estimated to be related
to 3.2 and 5.5 percent of cancer deaths in LMICs and
HICs, respectively (Lim and others 2012). Motivating
people to increase physical activity or reduce their body
weight has proven difficult; hence, there has been a
more recent emphasis on altering the built environment
(Diez Roux and others 2007; Giles-Corti and others
2005). In Northern Ireland, a greenways urbanization
project was considered very cost-effective at reducing
major chronic diseases, including breast and colon
cancer (Dallat and others 2013).
Environmental Factors
Other environmental risk factors, such as household air
pollution, may have a very minor role in causing cancer
in HICs, but these factors are much more important in
LMICs, where they may account for about 2.4 percent
of all cancer deaths (Evans and others 2013; Lim and
others 2012). In China, the risk of lung cancer among
smokers is three times that of nonsmokers, a risk ratio
that is much lower than in other countries (Lin and others 2008), probably as a result of the common practice
of cooking indoors with solid fuel—which significantly
increases lung cancer risk. Some improvements in cooking conditions have already taken place and further
improvements could potentially prevent a substantial
number of lung cancer deaths in the future.

38

Cancer

Many outdoor air pollutants may increase the risk of
neoplasms, most notably lung cancer (Raaschou-Nielsen
and others 2013). Increasing air pollution in large cities
in LMICs has caused concern about links to several
chronic diseases, including cancer (Evans and others
2013). Currently 3.6 percent of cancer deaths in LMICs
are attributed to ambient air pollution, compared with
2.4 percent in 1990 (Lim and others 2012).
Protective measures in the workplace have led to
the prevention of many cancers. A small proportion of
cancer deaths are attributed to occupational risk factors
(1.6 percent in LMICs and 1.3 percent in HICs). Despite
the small numbers, there is cause for concern regarding
occupational exposures in certain countries undergoing
development, including higher industrial exposures, as
well as a longer duration of exposure due to the common
practice of child labor (McCormack and Schuz 2012).
Asbestos is among the best known occupational exposures and has been strongly linked to mesothelioma and
lung cancer (IARC 1987). Because of past exposure, the
current proportion of lung cancer attributable to asbestos
is highest in the United States and the United Kingdom,
ranging from 12 to 18 percent, but the future burden is
likely to increase in China, India, and Russia, where current exposure to and use of asbestos are at the highest
levels worldwide (McCormack and others 2012).
Exposure to the ultraviolet component of sunlight
is the predominant environmental cause of skin cancer,
affecting mainly fair skinned persons who live predominantly in HICs (de Vries and Coebergh 2004). A recent
study predicted that protection from ultraviolet rays may
reduce the incidence of melanoma by 13 to 21 percent in
various Western populations over a 40-year period up to
2050 (de Vries and others 2012).
Hormonal and Reproductive Factors
Hormonal and reproductive factors play an important
role in the etiology of several cancers among women, in
particular, breast cancer. Established risk factors include
early age at menarche, older age at first birth, low parity, and late age at menopause (Beral, Bull, and Reeves
2005; Beral and others 2007; Beral and others 2011;
Reeves and others 2012; Rosner and Colditz 1996). The
current changes in these factors are expected to contribute to a 25 percent increase in breast cancer incidence
(McCormack and Boffetta 2011). Reversing the current
trend of these factors is not commonly considered feasible or desirable; hence, breast cancer prevention must
focus on other, more modifiable factors. These include
reductions in BMI, physical inactivity, and alcohol consumption, and increasing the duration of breast-feeding
(McCormack and Boffetta 2011).

Summary
Quantifying the totality of preventable cancers
through the effects of the interventions as described
above is a complicated exercise, given imprecision
in the estimates and risk factor interactions that are
not fully understood. One study has estimated that
around 35 percent of cancer deaths are avoidable by
modifying the major cancer risk factors (Danaei and
others 2005).
Of seven million deaths from cancer worldwide in
2001, 0.76 million preventable deaths were in HICs
and 1.67 million were in LMICs. Primary prevention
would most effectively target infection and tobacco, as
well as better nutrition and increased physical activity
(Jemal and others 2012; Jha 2009). In more developed
nations, interventions focusing on reducing smoking, improving dietary habits, and avoiding excess
weight are likely to be most effective (Jha and others
2013; Murray and others 2013; Pirie and others 2013;
Renehan and others 2010).
More effective early detection and better treatment
will further reduce the number of deaths in LMICs
(Farmer and others 2010; Sankaranarayanan and others
2011). The large burden of cancer in these regions and
the great potential to prevent them call for rational and
balanced investment in a broad spectrum of cancer
control activities that includes primary prevention,
screening, early detection, therapy, follow-up, and palliative care (Stewart 2012). In addition, surveillance of
risk factor information and cancer data, particularly in
LMICs, can improve global cancer risk assessment and
inform national cancer control planning.

PROSPECTS FOR ENHANCING CANCER
SURVEILLANCE SYSTEMS IN LMICS
Cancer is already a leading NCD at ages under 70 years
worldwide and is the most common cause of death in
more than 40 HICs. Global efforts are underway at a
high political level to combat the rising cancer and NCD
burden. The WHO Action Plan for the Global Strategy for
the Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases
provides a road map for 2013–20 that includes a target
for member states of a global reduction of 25 percent in
premature mortality from the four main NCD groups by
2025 (“25 by 25”) (WHO 2011b). Adequate surveillance
mechanisms at the country level are needed to monitor
progress. With a greater number of governments adopting national cancer control plans, attention is increasingly turning to population-based cancer surveillance
data as a central component in prioritizing and evaluating interventions.

Vital registration (mortality data) and populationbased cancer registries (incidence and survival data) are
complementary, and having the availability of both to
a high standard is ideal. But for many LMICs, national
vital statistics are unavailable, partial, or inaccurate.
Where data are available, the coverage and completeness of the mortality data are often poor. It is thus
much easier at present to quantify premature cancer
mortality for higher resource countries than for those
at the lower end. Efforts to develop and improve vital
registration systems are being augmented by a number
of verbal autopsy studies in countries and communities
where many deaths occur at home and without medical
attention (for example, the Million Death Study in India
[Dikshit and others 2012]).
Population-based cancer registries describe the present scale and profile of cancer in the community and aid
planning by assessing past and future trends. Knowing
the size and nature of the cancer problem serves as an
important stimulus to implement and change policy.
However, although it is feasible to implement PBCRs
even in the lowest income settings (Bray and others 2014),
their availability is limited in most countries undergoing
development, with only one in five LMICs currently
predisposed with the necessary population-based data
for cancer control action. This situation reflects a lack of
advocacy for the value of registries historically and the
subsequent lack of resources and prioritization of cancer
data for cancer control among the competing demands
on limited health care services (Wild 2014).
Nevertheless, positive momentum is building
through the recognition of the role of cancer and other
NCDs in hampering human development, changing
priorities within countries at the highest political level.
Importantly and as part of the global monitoring framework, WHO member states are being asked to collect
cancer incidence, by type of cancer per 100,000 population,
one of 25 indicators to monitor progress toward the 25
by 25 target, thereby obliging countries to establish and
sustain population-based cancer registries.
Clearly, in aligning registries to cancer control action,
technical guidance is needed to empower countries to
improve their information systems so that they can be
used for their vital purpose. Several technical and funding organizations are now working in a cooperative and
coordinated manner under the auspices of the Global
Initiative for Cancer Registry Development (http://gicr
.iarc.fr) to bring about the needed improvement in the
quantity and quality of data on cancer incidence through
investment in PBCRs. There is a longstanding and ongoing commitment at IARC to support the development
of such registries worldwide, particularly where they
are in limited supply and most needed, in most LMICs.

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

39

Map 2.2 Implementing the Global Initiative for Cancer Registry through Six IARC Regional Hubs for
Cancer Registration
Central and Western Asia
and Northern Africa
Izmir Cancer Registry,
Ismir, Turkey

Southern, Eastern
and South-Eastern
Asia Tata Memorial
Centre, Mumbai, India
Caribbean (Planned)

Latin America
Instituto Nacional de Cáncer
Buenos Aires, Argentina

Sub-Saharan Africa
African Cancer Registry
Network, Oxfordthods

Pacific Islands
(Planned)

• Deliver standardized methods
• Allow for flexibility in style to match local context and needs
• Inspire innovation
• Generate momentum to decrease timelines
• Create linkages with partner initiatives to provide bigger impact

Source: Global Initiative for Cancer Registry (GICR).
Note: IARC = International Agency for Research on Cancer.

The presence of six recently established IARC regional
hubs for cancer registration (map 2.2) across LMIC
regions is providing the necessary localized support and
training for cancer registries in the respective countries,
as well as strengthening registry networking in each
region to improve data standards and develop joint
research activities.

CONCLUSIONS
This chapter has examined the increasing global importance of cancer among the major NCDs, highlighted the
extent of the ongoing demographic and epidemiologic
transitions, described the key risk factors involved, and
highlighted the extent to which cancer deaths may be
avoided.
Changing fertility patterns and increasing life expectancy are leading to major changes in the scale of
the cancer problem worldwide for populations at all
levels of human development. A cancer transition is
clearly underway in countries transiting to high levels of income and development whereby reductions
in infection-related cancers are offset by concomitant
increases in cancers linked to a “Westernization” of
lifestyle, including “risky” behavior. Changes in tobacco

40

Cancer

habits and the expanding tobacco markets in LMICs
may have major consequences on the future burden of
lung and other tobacco-related cancers in the decades
that follow.
The global trends therefore place special emphasis on the need for better cancer control in LMICs
and the need for expanding coverage and quality of
population-based cancer registration systems in each
country. Cancer statistics should also serve as a catalyst for further research on human inequality and the
scale and profile of cancer from global and regional
perspectives, for better determination of how and why
macroeconomic determinants influence cancer indicators. It is imperative that public health clinicians and
cancer control specialists are alerted to the increasing
magnitude of cancer incidence and mortality worldwide. This analysis serves to highlight the need for
global action to reduce the increasing incidence and
mortality burden from cancer and alleviate suffering
among cancer patients.

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors thank Mathieu Laversanne, IARC, for statistical
analysis and generation of the graphics.

NOTES
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as follows,
based on estimates of gross national income (GNI) per capita
for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries (LICs): US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries (MICs) are subdivided:
a) lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
b) upper-middle-income (UMICs): US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries (HICs): US$12,746 or more

Except for figure 2.9 and estimates presented in the section
Risk Factors, Interventions and Policies, and Potential Impacts
on the Burden of Cancer, the maps and figures in this chapter
are based on incidence and mortality estimates for ages 0 to 69,
consistent with reporting in all DCP3 volumes. Global cancer
statistics are estimates for the year 2012 and have been provided by the International Agency for Research on Cancer from
its GLOBOCAN 2012 database. Observable population-based
data were derived from Cancer Incidence in Five Continents,
10th edition and for trends over time from CI5 Plus (http://
ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx). The discussion of burden
(including risk factors), however, includes all ages unless
otherwise noted. Interventions also apply to all age groups,
except where age ranges or cutoffs are specified.

REFERENCES
Agudo, A., C. Bonet, N. Travier, C. A. Gonzalez, P. Vineis, and
others. 2012. “Impact of Cigarette Smoking on Cancer
Risk in the European Prospective Investigation into
Cancer and Nutrition Study.” Journal of Clinical Oncology
30 (36): 4550–57. doi:JCO.2011.41.0183 [Pii] 10.1200
/JCO.2011.41.0183.
Beral, V., D. Bull, J. Green, and G. Reeves. 2007. “Ovarian
Cancer and Hormone Replacement Therapy in the Million
Women Study.” The Lancet 369 (9574): 1703–10. doi:S0140
-6736(07)60534-0 [Pii] 10.1016/S0140-6736(07)60534-0.
Beral, V., D. Bull, and G. Reeves. 2005. “Endometrial Cancer
and Hormone-Replacement Therapy in the Million
Women Study.” The Lancet 365 (9470): 1543–51. doi:S0140
-6736(05)66455-0 [Pii] 10.1016/S0140-6736(05)66455-0.
Beral, V., G. Reeves, D. Bull, and J. Green. 2011. “Breast Cancer
Risk in Relation to the Interval between Menopause and
Starting Hormone Therapy.” Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 103 (4): 296–305. doi:Djq527 [Pii] 10.1093/Jnci
/Djq527.
Bergstrom, A., P. Pisani, V. Tenet, A. Wolk, and H. O. Adami.
2001. “Overweight as an Avoidable Cause of Cancer
in Europe.” International Journal of Cancer 91 (3):
421–30. doi:10.1002/1097-0215(200002)9999:9999<::AID
-IJC1053>3.0.CO;2-T [Pii].
Beutels, P. 2001. “Economic Evaluations of Hepatitis
B Immunization: A Global Review of Recent Studies
(1994–2000).” Health Economics 10 (8): 751–74. doi:10.1002
/Hec.625 [Pii].

Bleyer, A., and H. G. Welch. 2012. “Effect of Three Decades of
Screening Mammography on Breast-Cancer Incidence.”
New England Journal of Medicine 367 (21): 1998–2005.
doi:10.1056/Nejmoa1206809.
Boffetta, P., M. Hashibe, C. La Vecchia, W. Zatonski, and
J. Rehm. 2006. “The Burden of Cancer Attributable to
Alcohol Drinking.” International Journal of Cancer 119 (4):
884–87. doi:10.1002/Ijc.21903.
Boffetta, P., M. Tubiana, C. Hill, M. Boniol, A. Aurengo, and
others. 2009. “The Causes of Cancer in France.” Annals
of Oncology 20 (3): 550–55. doi:Mdn597 [Pii]10.1093
/Annonc/Mdn597.
Bray, F. 2014. “Transitions in Human Development and the
Global Cancer Burden.” In World Cancer Report 2014,
edited by C. P. Wild and B. A. Stewart. Lyon, France:
International Agency for Research on Cancer.
Bray, F., A. Jemal, N. Grey, J. Ferlay, and D. Forman. 2012.
“Global Cancer Transitions According to the Human
Development Index (2008–2030): A Population-Based
Study.” The Lancet Oncology 13 (8): 790–801. doi:10.1016
/S1470-2045(12)70211-5.
Bray, F., J. Lortet-Tieulent, J. Ferlay, D. Forman, and A. Auvinen.
2010. “Prostate Cancer Incidence and Mortality Trends in
37 European Countries: An Overview.” European Journal
of Cancer 46 (17): 3040–52. doi:S0959-8049(10)00878-6
[Pii]10.1016/J.Ejca.2010.09.013.
Bray, F., P. McCarron, and D. M. Parkin. 2004. “The Changing
Global Patterns of Female Breast Cancer Incidence and
Mortality.” Breast Cancer Research 6 (6): 229–39. doi:Bcr932
[Pii]10.1186/Bcr932.
Bray, F., A. Znaor, P. Cueva, A. Korir, R. Swaminathan, and
others. 2014. “Planning and Developing Population-Based
Cancer Registration in Low- and Middle-Income Settings.”
Technical Publication 43, International Agency for Research
on Cancer, Lyon, France.
Brown, I. J., I. Tzoulaki, V. Candeias, and P. Elliott. 2009. “Salt
Intakes around the World: Implications for Public Health.”
International Journal of Epidemiology 38 (3): 791–813.
doi:Dyp139 [Pii] 10.1093/Ije/Dyp139.
Center, M. M., A. Jemal, R. A. Smith, and E. Ward. 2009.
“Worldwide Variations in Colorectal Cancer.” CA: A
Cancer Journal for Clinicians 59 (6): 366–78. doi:59/6/366
[Pii]10.3322/Caac.20038.
Center, M. M., A. Jemal, and E. Ward. 2009. “International
Trends in Colorectal Cancer Incidence Rates.” Cancer
Epidemiology Biomarkers & Prevention 18 (6): 1688–94.
doi:18/6/1688 [Pii]10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-09-0090.
Chang, M. H., C. J. Chen, M. S. Lai, H. M. Hsu, T. C. Wu,
and others. 1997. “Universal Hepatitis B Vaccination in
Taiwan and the Incidence of Hepatocellular Carcinoma
in Children. Taiwan Childhood Hepatoma Study Group.”
New England Journal of Medicine 336 (26): 1855–59.
doi:10.1056/NEJM199706263362602.
Chokunonga, E., M. Z. Borok, Z. M. Chirenje, A. M. Nyakabau,
and D. M. Parkin. 2013. “Trends in the Incidence of Cancer
in the Black Population of Harare, Zimbabwe 1991–2010.”
International Journal of Cancer 133 (3): 721–29. doi:10.1002
/Ijc.28063.

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

41

Cogliano, V. J., R. Baan, K. Straif, Y. Grosse, B. LaubySecretan, and others. 2011. “Preventable Exposures
Associated with Human Cancers.” Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 103 (24): 1827–39. doi:Djr483 [Pii]
10.1093/Jnci/Djr483.
Dallat, M. A., I. Soerjomataram, R. F. Hunter, M. A. Tully,
K. J. Cairns, and others. 2013. “Urban Greenways Have
the Potential to Increase Physical Activity Levels CostEffectively.” European Journal of Public Health 24 (2): 190–95.
doi:Ckt035[Pii]10.1093/Eurpub/Ckt035.
Danaei, G., S. Vander Hoorn, A. D. Lopez, C. J. Murray,
and M. Ezzati. 2005. “Causes of Cancer in the World:
Comparative Risk Assessment of Nine Behavioural and
Environmental Risk Factors.” The Lancet 366 (9499):
1784–93. doi:S0140-6736(05)67725-2 [Pii]10.1016
/S0140-6736(05)67725-2.
de Martel, C., J. Ferlay, S. Franceschi, J. Vignat, F. Bray, and
others. 2012. “Global Burden of Cancers Attributable to
Infections in 2008: A Review and Synthetic Analysis.” The
Lancet Oncology 13 (6): 607–15. doi:S1470-2045(12)70137-7
[Pii]10.1016/S1470-2045(12)70137-7.
de Vries, E., M. Arnold, E. Altsitsiadis, M. Trakatelli, B. Hinrichs,
and others. 2012. “Potential Impact of Interventions Resulting
in Reduced Exposure to Ultraviolet (UV) Radiation (UVA
and UVB) on Skin Cancer Incidence in Four European
Countries, 2010–2050.” British Journal of Dermatology 167
(Suppl. 2): 53–62. doi:10.1111/J.1365-2133.2012.11087.X.
de Vries, E., and J. W. Coebergh. 2004. “Cutaneous Malignant
Melanoma in Europe.” European Journal of Cancer
40 (16): 2355–66. doi:S0959804904004678 [Pii]10.1016/J
.Ejca.2004.06.003.
Diez Roux, A. V., K. R. Evenson, A. P. McGinn, D. G. Brown,
L. Moore, and others. 2007. “Availability of Recreational
Resources and Physical Activity in Adults.” American Journal
of Public Health 97 (3): 493–99. doi:AJPH.2006.087734 [Pii]
10.2105/AJPH.2006.087734.
Dikshit, R., P. C. Gupta, C. Ramasundarahettige, V. Gajalakshmi,
L. Aleksandrowicz, and others. 2012. “Cancer Mortality in
India: A Nationally Representative Survey.” The Lancet
379 (9828): 1807–16. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(12)60358-4.
Doll, R. 1990. “Are We Winning the Fight against Cancer? An
Epidemiological Assessment. EACR-Muhlbock Memorial
Lecture.” European Journal of Cancer 26 (4): 500–08.
Doll, R., P. Payne, and A. J. H. Waterhouse. 1966. Cancer
Incidence in Five Continents: A Technical Report. New York:
Springer.
Doll, R., and R. Peto. 1981. “The Causes of Cancer: Quantitative
Estimates of Avoidable Risks of Cancer in the United States
Today.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 66 (6):
1191–308.
Doll, R., R. Peto, J. Boreham, and I. Sutherland. 2004. “Mortality
in Relation to Smoking: 50 Years’ Observations on Male
British Doctors.” British Medical Journal 328 (7455): 1519.
doi: 10.1136/Bmj.38142.554479.AE Bmj.38142.554479
.AE [Pii].
Evans, J., A. Van Donkelaar, R. V. Martin, R. Burnett,
D. G. Rainham, and others. 2013. “Estimates of Global
Mortality Attributable to Particulate Air Pollution Using

42

Cancer

Satellite Imagery.” Environmental Research 120: 33–42.
doi:S0013-9351(12)00240-X[Pii]10.1016/J.Envres.2012.08.005.
Ezzati, M., S. J. Henley, A. D. Lopez, and M. J. Thun. 2005. “Role
of Smoking in Global and Regional Cancer Epidemiology:
Current Patterns and Data Needs.” International Journal of
Cancer 116 (6): 963–71. doi:10.1002/Ijc.21100.
Farmer, P., J. Frenk, F. M. Knaul, L. N. Shulman, G. Alleyne, and
others. 2010. “Expansion of Cancer Care and Control in
Countries of Low and Middle Income: A Call to Action.” The
Lancet 376 (9747): 1186–93. doi:S0140-6736(10)61152-X
[Pii] 10.1016/S0140-6736(10)61152-X.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser,
and others. 2013. GLOBOCAN 2012 v1.0. In Cancer
Incidence and Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase
No. 11 [Internet]. Lyon, France: International Agency for
Research on Cancer.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, C. Mathers, and
others. 2015. “Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide:
Sources, Methods and Major Patterns in GLOBOCAN
2012.” International Journal of Cancer 136 (5): E359–86.
doi:10.1002/Ijc.29210.
Forman, D., C. de Martel, C. J. Lacey, I. Soerjomataram,
J. Lortet-Tieulent, and others. 2012. “Global Burden of
Human Papillomavirus and Related Diseases.” Vaccine
30 (Suppl. 5): F12–23. doi:S0264-410X(12)01080-8 [Pii]
10.1016/J.Vaccine.2012.07.055.
Friedenreich, C., T. Norat, K. Steindorf, M. C. BoutronRuault, T. Pischon, and others. 2006. “Physical Activity
and Risk of Colon and Rectal Cancers: The European
Prospective Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition.”
Cancer Epidemiological Biomarkers & Prevention 15 (12):
2398–407. doi: 15/12/2398 [Pii] 10.1158/1055-9965
.EPI-06-0595.
Giles-Corti, B., M. H. Broomhall, M. Knuiman, C. Collins,
K. Douglas, and others. 2005. “Increasing Walking: How
Important Is Distance to, Attractiveness, and Size of Public
Open Space?” American Journal of Preventive Medicine 28
(2 Suppl. 2): 169–76. doi:S0749-3797(04)00298-3 [Pii]
10.1016/J.Amepre.2004.10.018.
Giovannucci, E., A. Ascherio, E. B. Rimm, G. A. Colditz,
M. J. Stampfer, and others. 1995. “Physical Activity, Obesity,
and Risk for Colon Cancer and Adenoma in Men.” Annals
of Internal Medicine 122 (5): 327–34.
Goldie, S. J., M. O’Shea, N. G. Campos, M. Diaz, S. Sweet,
and others. 2008. “Health and Economic Outcomes of
HPV 16,18 Vaccination in 72 GAVI-Eligible Countries.”
Vaccine 26 (32): 4080–93. doi:S0264-410X(08)00493
-3[Pii]10.1016/J.Vaccine.2008.04.053.
Goldstein, S. T., F. Zhou, S. C. Hadler, B. P. Bell, E. E. Mast, and
others. 2005. “A Mathematical Model to Estimate Global
Hepatitis B Disease Burden and Vaccination Impact.”
International Journal of Epidemiology 34 (6): 1329–39.
doi:Dyi206 [Pii]10.1093/Ije/Dyi206.
Hanley, J. A. 2001. “A Heuristic Approach to the Formulas for
Population Attributable Fraction.” Journal of Epidemiology
and Community Health 55 (7): 508–14.
Harper, D. M., E. L. Franco, C. Wheeler, D. G. Ferris,
D. Jenkins, and others. 2004. “Efficacy of a Bivalent L1

Virus-Like Particle Vaccine in Prevention of Infection
with Human Papillomavirus Types 16 and 18 in Young
Women: A Randomised Controlled Trial.” The Lancet
364 (9447): 1757–65. doi:S0140673604173984 [Pii]10.1016
/S0140-6736(04)17398-4.
Harriss, D. J., G. Atkinson, A. Batterham, K. George,
N. T. Cable, and others. 2009. “Lifestyle Factors and
Colorectal Cancer Risk (2): A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis of Associations with Leisure-Time Physical
Activity.” Colorectal Disease 11 (7): 689–701. doi:CDI1767
[Pii] 10.1111/J.1463-1318.2009.01767.X.
Herrero, R., W. Quint, A. Hildesheim, P. Gonzalez, L. Struijk,
and others. 2013. “Reduced Prevalence of Oral Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) 4 Years after Bivalent HPV
Vaccination in A Randomized Clinical Trial in Costa Rica.”
Plos One 8 (7): E68329. doi:10.1371/Journal.Pone.0068329
PONE-D-12-40404 [Pii].
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 1987.
Overall Evaluations of Carcinogenicity: An Updating of
IARC Monographs 1–440. Monographs on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, IARC, Lyon, France.
———. 2004. “Tobacco Smoke and Involuntary Smoking.”
Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to
Humans, Volume 83, IARC, Lyon, France.
———. 2010. “Alcohol Consumption and Ethyl Carbamate.”
Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to
Humans, IARC, Lyon, France.
Jemal, A., F. Bray, D. Forman, M. O’Brien, J. Ferlay, and
others. 2012. “Cancer Burden in Africa and Opportunities
for Prevention.” Cancer 118 (18): 4372–84. doi:10.1002
/Cncr.27410.
Jemal, A., M. M. Center, C. Desantis, and E. M. Ward.
2010. “Global Patterns of Cancer Incidence and Mortality
Rates and Trends.” Cancer Epidemiology Biomarkers &
Prevention 19 (8): 1893–907. doi:1055-9965.EPI-10-0437
[Pii] 10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-10-0437.
Jha, P. 2009. “Avoidable Global Cancer Deaths and Total Deaths
from Smoking.” Nature Reviews Cancer 9 (9): 655–64.
doi:Nrc2703 [Pii] 10.1038/Nrc2703.
Jha, P., C. Ramasundarahettige, V. Landsman, B. Rostron,
M. Thun, and others. 2013. “21st-Century Hazards of
Smoking and Benefits of Cessation in the United States.”
New England Journal of Medicine 368 (4): 341–50. doi:0.1056
/Nejmsa1211128.
Kane, M. A., B. Serrano, S. De Sanjose, and S. Wittet. 2012.
“Implementation of Human Papillomavirus Immunization
in the Developing World.” Vaccine 30 (Suppl. 5):
F192–200. doi:S0264-410X(12)00956-5 [Pii] 10.1016/J
.Vaccine.2012.06.075.
Karim-Kos, H. E., E. de Vries, I. Soerjomataram, V. Lemmens,
S. Siesling, and J. W. Coebergh. 2008. “Recent Trends of
Cancer in Europe: A Combined Approach of Incidence,
Survival and Mortality for 17 Cancer Sites Since the 1990s.”
European Journal of Cancer 44 (10): 1345–89. doi: 10.1016/j.
ejca.2007.12.015.
Lim, S. S., T. Vos, A. D. Flaxman, G. Danaei, K. Shibuya,
and others. 2012. “A Comparative Risk Assessment of
Burden of Disease and Injury Attributable to 67 Risk

Factors and Risk Factor Clusters in 21 Regions, 1990–2010:
A Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2010.” The Lancet 380 (9859): 2224–60. doi:10.1016
/S0140-6736(12)61766-8.
Lin, H. H., M. Murray, T. Cohen, C. Colijn, and M. Ezzati.
2008. “Effects of Smoking and Solid-Fuel Use on COPD,
Lung Cancer, and Tuberculosis in China: A Time-Based,
Multiple Risk Factor, Modelling Study.” The Lancet 372
(9648): 1473–83. doi:S0140-6736(08)61345-8 [Pii] 10.1016
/S0140-6736(08)61345-8.
Lortet-Tieulent, J., E. Renteria, L. Sharp, E. Weiderpass,
H. Comber, and others. 2013. “Convergence of Decreasing
Male and Increasing Female Incidence Rates in Major
Tobacco-Related Cancers in Europe in 1988–2010.”
European Journal of Cancer. doi: S0959-8049(13)00952-0
[Pii] 10.1016/J.Ejca.2013.10.014.
Lozano, R., M. Naghavi, K. Foreman, S. Lim, K. Shibuya, and
others. 2012. “Global and Regional Mortality from 235
Causes of Death for 20 Age Groups in 1990 and 2010:
A Systematic Analysis for the Global Burden of Disease
Study 2010.” The Lancet 380 (9859): 2095–128. doi:S0140
-6736(12)61728-0 [Pii]10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61728-0.
Makela, P., K. Tryggvesson, and I. Rossow. 2002. “Who Drinks
More or Less When Policies Change? The Evidence from
50 Years of Nordic Studies.” In The Effects of Nordic Alcohol
Policies: Analyses of Changes in Control Systems, edited by
R. Room. Helsinki: Nordic Council for Alcohol and Drug
Research.
Martin-Moreno, J. M., I. Soerjomataram, and G. Magnusson.
2008. “Cancer Causes and Prevention: A Condensed
Appraisal in Europe in 2008.” European Journal of Cancer
44 (10): 1390–403. doi:S0959-8049(08)00090-7 [Pii]
10.1016/J.Ejca.2008.02.002.
McCormack, V. A., and P. Boffetta. 2011. “Today’s Lifestyles,
Tomorrow’s Cancers: Trends in Lifestyle Risk Factors for
Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Annals
of Oncology 22 (11): 2349–57. doi:Mdq763 [Pii] 10.1093
/Annonc/Mdq763.
McCormack, V., J. Peto, G. Byrnes, K. Straif, and P. Boffetta.
2012. “Estimating the Asbestos-Related Lung Cancer
Burden from Mesothelioma Mortality.” British Journal
of Cancer 106 (3): 575–84. doi:Bjc2011563 [Pii] 10.1038
/Bjc.2011.563.
McCormack, V. A., and J. Schuz. 2012. “Africa’s Growing
Cancer Burden: Environmental and Occupational
Contributions.” Cancer Epidemiology 36 (1): 1–7. doi:S1877
-7821(11)00146-9 [Pii] 10.1016/J.Canep.2011.09.005.
Monninkhof, E. M., S. G. Elias, F. A. Vlems, I. Van Der Tweel,
A. J. Schuit, and others. 2007. “Physical Activity and Breast
Cancer: A Systematic Review.” Epidemiology 18 (1): 137–57.
doi:10.1097/01.Ede.0000251167.75581.98.
Muir, C. S., J. F. Fraumeni, Jr., and R. Doll. 1994. “The
Interpretation of Time Trends.” Cancer Surveys 19–20: 5–21.
Murray, C. J., J. Abraham, M. K. Ali, M. Alvarado, C. Atkinson,
and others. 2013. “The State of US Health, 1990–2010:
Burden of Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors.” Journal
of the American Medical Association 310 (6): 591–606.
doi:1710486 [Pii] 10.1001/Jama.2013.13805.

The Changing Global Burden of Cancer: Transitions in Human Development and Implications for Cancer Prevention and Control

43

Ng, M., M. K. Freeman, T. D. Fleming, M. Robinson,
L. Dwyer-Lindgren, and others. 2014. “Smoking Prevalence
and Cigarette Consumption in 187 Countries, 1980–2012.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 311 (2): 183–92.
doi:10.1001/Jama.2013.284692.
Parkin, D. M. 2006. “The Evolution of the Population-Based
Cancer Registry.” Nature Reviews Cancer 6 (8): 603–12.
doi:Nrc1948 [Pii] 10.1038/Nrc1948.
———. 2011. “Cancers Attributable to Dietary Factors in the
UK in 2010. IV. Salt.” British Journal of Cancer 105 (Suppl. 2):
S31–33. doi:Bjc2011480 [Pii] 10.1038/Bjc.2011.480.
Parkin, D. M., F. Bray, J. Ferlay, and A. Jemal. 2014. “Cancer in
Africa 2012.” Cancer Epidemilogy Biomarkers & Prevention
23 (6): 953–66. doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-14-0281.
Pirie, K., R. Peto, G. K. Reeves, J. Green, and V. Beral. 2013. “The
21st Century Hazards of Smoking and Benefits of Stopping:
A Prospective Study of One Million Women in the UK.” The
Lancet 381 (9861): 133–41. doi:S0140-6736(12)61720-6
[Pii]10.1016/S0140-6736(12)61720-6.
Pischon, T., P. H. Lahmann, H. Boeing, C. Friedenreich,
T. Norat, and others. 2006. “Body Size and Risk of
Colon and Rectal Cancer in the European Prospective
Investigation into Cancer and Nutrition (EPIC).” Journal of
the National Cancer Institute 98 (13): 920–31. doi:98/13/920
[Pii]10.1093/Jnci/Djj246.
Raaschou-Nielsen, O., Z. J. Andersen, R. Beelen, E. Samoli,
M. Stafoggia, and others. 2013. “Air Pollution and Lung Cancer
Incidence in 17 European Cohorts: Prospective Analyses
from the European Study of Cohorts for Air Pollution Effects
(ESCAPE).” The Lancet Oncology 14 (9): 813–22. doi:S1470
-2045(13)70279-1 [Pii]10.1016/S1470-2045(13)70279-1.
Reeves, G. K., K. Pirie, J. Green, D. Bull, and V. Beral. 2012.
“Comparison of the Effects of Genetic and Environmental
Risk Factors on In Situ and Invasive Ductal Breast Cancer.”
International Journal of Cancer 131 (4): 930–37. doi:10.1002
/Ijc.26460.
Rehm, J., and K. D. Shield. 2013. “Global Alcohol-Attributable
Deaths from Cancer, Liver Cirrhosis, and Injury in 2010.”
Alcohol Research 35 (2): 174–83.
Renehan, A. G., I. Soerjomataram, M. Tyson, M. Egger,
M. Zwahlen, and others. 2010. “Incident Cancer Burden
Attributable to Excess Body Mass Index in 30 European
Countries.” International Journal of Cancer 126 (3):
692–702. doi:10.1002/Ijc.24803.
Rockhill, B., B. Newman, and C. Weinberg. 1998. “Use and
Misuse of Population Attributable Fractions.” American
Journal of Public Health 88 (1): 15–19.
Rosner, B., and G. A. Colditz. 1996. “Nurses’ Health Study: LogIncidence Mathematical Model of Breast Cancer Incidence.”
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 88 (6): 359–64.
Sankaranarayanan, R., R. Swaminathan, K. Jayant, and
H. Brenner. 2011. “An Overview of Cancer Survival in
Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Central America: The Case
for Investment in Cancer Health Services.” IARC Scientific
Publications 162: 257–91.
Shield, K. D., M. Rylett, G. Gmel, T. A. Kehoe-Chan, and
J. Rehm. 2013. “Global Alcohol Exposure Estimates by
Country, Territory and Region for 2005: A Contribution

44

Cancer

to the Comparative Risk Assessment for the 2010 Global
Burden of Disease Study.” Addiction 108 (5): 912–22.
doi:10.1111/Add.12112.
Soerjomataram, I., E. Pukkala, H. Brenner, and J. W. Coebergh.
2008. “On the Avoidability of Breast Cancer in Industrialized
Societies: Older Mean Age at First Birth as an Indicator
of Excess Breast Cancer Risk.” Breast Cancer Research and
Treatment 111 (2): 297–302. doi:10.1007/S10549-007-9778-2.
Stevens, G. A., G. M. Singh, Y. Lu, G. Danaei, J. K. Lin, and
others. 2012. “National, Regional, and Global Trends in
Adult Overweight and Obesity Prevalences.” Population
Health Metrics 10 (1): 22. doi:1478-7954-10-22 [Pii]
10.1186/1478-7954-10-22.
Stewart, B. W. 2012. “Priorities for Cancer Prevention: Lifestyle
Choices versus Unavoidable Exposures.” The Lancet
Oncology 13 (3): E126–33. doi:S1470-2045(11)70221-2
[Pii]10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70221-2.
Talley, M. B. 2010. Examining the Impact of Development,
Tobacco Taxation, and Tobacco Prices on Global Adult Male
Smoking Prevalence. Altanta, GA: Georgia Institute of
Technology, Georgia State University.
Thun, M., R. Peto, J. Boreham, and A. D. Lopez. 2012. “Stages
of the Cigarette Epidemic on Entering Its Second Century.”
Tobacco Control 21 (2): 96–101. doi:Tobaccocontrol-2011
-050294 [Pii] 10.1136/Tobaccocontrol-2011-050294.
UNDP (United Nations Develpoment Programme). 2009.
Human Development Report 2009: Overcoming Barriers:
Human Mobility and Development. New York: UNDP.
Vaccarella, S., J. Lortet-Tieulent, M. Plummer, S. Franceschi,
and F. Bray. 2013. “Worldwide Trends in Cervical Cancer
Incidence: Impact of Screening against Changes in
Disease Risk Factors.” European Journal of Cancer 49 (15):
3262–73. doi:S0959-8049(13)00358-4 [Pii]10.1016/J.Ejca
.2013.04.024.
Wabinga, H. R., P. M. Amulen, C. Okello, L. Mbus, and
D. M. Parkin. 2014. “Trends in the Incidence of Cancer
in Kampala, Uganda 1991–2010.” International Journal of
Cancer 135 (2): 432–9. doi: 10.1002/ijc.28661. http://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/24615279.
WCRF (World Cancer Research Fund) and AICR (American
Institute for Cancer Research). 2007. Food, Nutrition,
Physical Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global
Perspective. Washington, DC: WCRF and AICR.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2008. Report on the
Global Tobacco Epidemic, 2008: The MPOWER Package.
Geneva: WHO.
———. 2011a. Global Status Report on Alcohol and Health.
Geneva: WHO.
———. 2011b. Global Status Report on Non-Communicable
Diseases 2010. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2013. “Global Health Observatory Data Repository.”
WHO, Geneva. http://apps.who.int/gho/data/node.main
.a859?lang=en.
Wild, C. P. 2014. “Foreword.” In Planning and Developing
Population-Based Cancer Registration in Low- and
Middle-Income Settings, edited by F. Bray, A. Znaor,
P. Cueva, A. Korir, R. Swaminathan, and others. Lyon,
France: IARC.

Chapter

3

Breast Cancer
Benjamin O. Anderson, Joseph Lipscomb, Raul H. Murillo, and
David B. Thomas

INTRODUCTION
Disparities in Global Breast Cancer Outcomes1
Breast cancer is the world’s most common cancer
among women, and it is the most likely reason that a
woman will die from cancer (maps 3.1 and 3.2). Breast
cancer is becoming an increasingly urgent problem in
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), where
incidence rates, historically low, have been rising by
as much as 5 percent per year (Bray and others 2013).
High-income countries (HICs) report the highest breast
cancer incidence rates (figure 3.1), but these countries
have also made the most progress in improving outcomes (Jemal and others 2002). In 2010, the majority
of the 425,000 global breast cancer deaths occurred in
LMICs, and that percentage is expected to grow (Parkin
and Fernandez 2006).
Breast cancer fatality rates are inversely correlated
with per capita gross domestic product (GDP) (Greenlee
and others 2000). Historically, breast cancer incidence
had been low in LMICs, but these rates are rising disproportionately at the same time that mortality rates
are continuing to rise or remain high (figure 3.2). The
aging of current global population means that nearly
50 percent more women will develop and die from
breast cancer in 2020 than in 2002. This estimate does
not take into account the likely increases in age-specific
breast cancer incidence and mortality rates, especially
among recent birth cohorts and among urban women in

LMICs, because of changes in their childbearing patterns
and their adoption of Western lifestyles (Parkin and
Fernandez 2006; Porter 2008). The number of young
lives lost is even more disproportionate than the total
number; in 2010, breast cancer killed 68,000 women ages
15–49 years in LMICs, compared with 26,000 in this age
range in HICs (Forouzanfar and others 2011).
HICs have made tremendous progress in improving outcomes (figure 3.2). Mortality rates, which had
been essentially unchanged in the United States for
the five decades between 1930 and 1980, have dropped
nearly 2 percent each year since 1990 (Jemal and others 2009). Similar reductions have occurred in other
HICs, such as Norway (Kalager and others 2010). The
improvements are attributable to early detection by
screening, combined with timely and effective treatment
(Weir and others 2003). Randomized trials of screening
mammography in the 1970s and 1980s demonstrated
that early detection leads to stage shifting, improved
survival, and reduced mortality (Chu, Smart, and
Tarone 1988). Endocrine therapy for estrogen receptor
(ER)–positive cancers and cytotoxic chemotherapy for
ER-negative cancers improve survival among early and
locally advanced breast cancers (Clarke 2006; Perloff and
others 1988).
Low survival rates in LMICs are largely attributable to late-stage presentation and limited diagnostic
and treatment capacities (Hisham and Yip 2003). In
India, 50–70 percent of cases are diagnosed with locally

Corresponding author: Benjamin O. Anderson, MD, banderso@u.washington.edu

45

Map 3.1 Global Breast Cancer Incidence in Women in 2012
IBRD 41380 | FEBRUARY 2015

Breast Cancer Women 0–69 years
ASR (World) Incidence

Greater than 57.4
41.1–57.4
31.1–41.0
22.4–31.0
Less than 22.4
No data

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: Values are estimated ASR per 100,000 women. ASR = age-standardized rate.

Map 3.2 Global Breast Cancer Mortality in Women in 2012

Breast Cancer Women 0–69 years
ASR (World) Mortality

Greater than 15.0
12.1–15.0
10.1–12.1
8.3–10.1
Less than 8.3
No data

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: Values are estimated ASR per 100,000 women. ASR = age-standardized rate.

46

Cancer

Figure 3.1 Trends in Age-Standardized Incidence Rates in Women, Selected Countries, 1975–2010
b.

19

Calendar year
France
Denmark
United
Finland
Kingdom
Spain
Slovak Republic

40

20

0

Calendar year
Philippines
Singapore
China
Japan
India
Thailand

80

60

40

20

0

75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
00
20
05
20
10

0

60

100

19

20

c.
Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

40

80

75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
00
20
05
20
10

60

100

19

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

80

75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
00
20
05
20
10

Age-standardized (world) incidence rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a.
100

Calendar year
United States
Canada
New Zealand
Australia
Colombia
Costa Rica

Sources: CI5 Plus (http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx); and Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: Values are age-standardized rates of breast cancer incidence per 100,000 women, for the world population structure.

advanced or metastatic disease (Chopra 2001); the same
was true of 38 percent of European and 30 percent of
American cases in the early 1990s (Sant and others
2004). Accordingly, efforts to promote early detection followed by appropriate treatment are essential
components of population-based breast cancer control
strategies.
The two strategies of early detection and adjuvant
systemic therapy are synergistic and mutually dependent
for improving outcomes; early detection only works if it
can be followed by prompt therapy. Mathematical modeling suggests that between 28 percent and 65 percent
of breast cancer mortality reduction can be attributed
to early detection; the balance is due to pharmacotherapy (Berry and others 2005). The interdependence of
early detection and treatment underscores the essential
role of guidelines for administering this comprehensive
strategy in limited-resource settings to shift morbidity
and mortality rates at the global level.

Risk Factors and Risk Reduction Strategies
Breast cancer risk increases with some factors that cannot be modified, such as age, genetic and familial risks,
younger age at menarche, and older age at menopause;
some factors that are somewhat modifiable, including
delayed childbearing, avoidance of lactation, radiation
exposure, and use of hormone replacement therapy;
and some that are more modifiable, including body
mass index, sedentary lifestyle, and moderate to high
levels of alcohol use (McTiernan, Porter, and Potter
2008). Modifying these behaviors to the extent possible,
although not proven in clinical trials to reduce risk, is
likely to be beneficial, can be good for general health
and noncommunicable disease prevention, and may
be of interest to policy makers in LMICs. However,
because most of these factors elevate risk only marginally, even successful reduction of them may only
have a small effect on overall risk. Some risk factors
are not amenable to change; others are associated with

Breast Cancer

47

Figure 3.2 Trends in Age-Standardized Breast Cancer Mortality Rates in Women, Selected Countries, 1975–2010
b.

15

10

5

20

15

10

5

20

15

10

5

0

19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
00
20
05
20
10

0

25

19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
00
20
05
20
10

0

Age-standardized (world) mortality rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized (world) mortality rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

20

c.

25

19
75
19
80
19
85
19
90
19
95
20
00
20
05
20
10

Age-standardized (world) mortality rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a.
25

Calendar year

Calendar year

Calendar year

United Kingdom
France
Slovak
Republic

Denmark
Finland
Spain

Israel
Japan

Singapore
Republic of Korea

New Zealand
United States
Costa Rica

Canada
Australia
Colombia

Sources: Ferlay and others 2013; WHO Mortality Database (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/mortality_rawdata/en/index.html).
Note: Values are age-standardized rates of breast cancer mortality per 100,000 women, for the world population structure.

desirable outcomes, such as the education of women,
which has major societal benefits even if it tends to
delay childbearing.

RESOURCE-STRATIFIED GUIDELINES
Need for Cancer Care Guidelines Explicitly
Addressing Resource Limitations
Early detection and comprehensive treatment together
can improve outcomes. In HICs and upper-middleincome countries, the guidelines for achieving these
goals are defined, updated, and disseminated (Morrow
and others 2002; Smith 2000; Theriault and others
2013). The World Health Organization (WHO) has
pointed out the limited utility of these guidelines in
resource-constrained countries; they fail to include
implementation costs and provide no guidance as to
how treatment that is effective but less than optimal
(and less expensive) could be provided affordably for
poorer populations (WHO 2002).

48

Cancer

Breast Health Global Initiative
Evidence-based, economically feasible, and culturally
appropriate guidelines that can be used in settings with
limited resources to improve outcomes have been developed by the Breast Health Global Initiative (BHGI),
an international health alliance established in 2002.
The BHGI has held five global summits addressing key
aspects of care:
• Health care disparities, Seattle, Washington, 2002
(Anderson and others 2003)
• Evidence-based resource allocation, Bethesda,
Maryland, 2005 (Anderson and others 2006)
• Guideline implementation, Budapest, 2007 (Anderson
and others 2008)
• Optimizing outcomes, Chicago, Illinois, 2010
(Anderson and others 2011)
• Supportive care and quality of life, Vienna, 2012
(Cardoso and others 2013; Cleary and others 2013;
Ganz and others 2013)

Modeled after the National Comprehensive Cancer
Network in the United States (Winn and Botnick 1997),
the BHGI applied an evidence-based consensus panel
process to build a framework defining resource prioritization for early detection (Yip and others 2008), diagnosis
(Shyyan and others 2008), treatment (Eniu and others
2008), and delivery systems (Eniu and others 2008) at four
levels of available resources: basic, limited, enhanced, and
maximal (box 3.1). The framework is designed to facilitate strategy development and decision making by policy
makers and health care administrators initiating breast
cancer control programs or reviewing existing services.
Different resource levels may apply to different areas of
a country, because health care access and resources vary
with infrastructure and geography. The same methodology has been applied to the development of guidelines
for the management of hepatocellular carcinoma in Asia
(Poon and others 2009), non-small cell lung carcinoma
(Soo and others 2009), endometrial cancer (Tangjitgamol
and others 2009), head and neck cancer (Wee and others
2009), and HER2/neu-positive breast cancer (Wong and
others 2009).

BHGI GUIDELINES
Guidelines on Early Detection
Shifting the stage distribution of disease to earlier stages
is a necessary step to improving outcomes in LMICs,

where many women typically present with locally
advanced or metastatic tumors. Achieving stage shifting
is likely to reduce mortality; even if this effect is small,
the quality of life will be improved. Women would no
longer present with large, sometimes ulcerated masses
that are painful, odiferous, ostracizing, and amenable
only to palliative treatment. Breast-preserving surgery
will also be possible in more cases, further reducing
morbidity and enhancing the quality of life.
Early detection approaches include screening for
asymptomatic disease and early diagnosis of symptomatic disease (table 3.1). As a new screening program is
implemented, more cancers will be detected initially,
creating an apparent increase in disease incidence. As the
screening program becomes established, the detection
rate will decline to a steady state. Once diagnosed, more
patients will require treatment, at a cost to the health
care system. This increased cost may be partially offset by
lower total treatment costs, because patients with earlier
stage disease require less therapy, but this model assumes
that the patients would have been treated in both cases.
The cost and human resource requirements of increased
demand for treatment must be factored into any decision to establish a screening program.
Mammographic Screening
The efficacy of mammographic screening was established in trials in HICs that included monitoring

Box 3.1

Definitions of Breast Health Global Initiative Resource Levels
• Basic. Core resources or fundamental services
that are necessary for any breast health care system to function; basic-level services are typically
applied in a single clinical interaction.
• Limited. Second-tier resources or services that
are intended to produce major improvements in
outcome and are attainable with limited financial
means and modest infrastructure; limited-level
services may involve single or multiple clinical
interactions.
• Enhanced. Third-tier resources or services that
are optional but important; enhanced-level
resources should produce further improvements
in outcome and increase the number and quality
of therapeutic options and patient choices.

• Maximal. High-level resources or services that
may be used in some high-income countries and/
or may be recommended by breast care guidelines
that are not adapted to resource constraints. They
should be considered lower priority than those
resources or services listed in the basic, limited, or
enhanced categories, on the basis of cost and/or
impracticality for broad use in resource-limited
environments. To be useful, maximal-level
resources typically depend on the existence and
functionality of all lower-level resources.
Source: Anderson and others 2008.
Note: The stratification scheme implies incrementally increasing resource allocation at the basic, limited, and enhanced levels. Maximal-level resources should
not be targeted for implementation in LMICs, even though they may be used in
some higher-resource settings.

Breast Cancer

49

Table 3.1 Early Detection Resource Allocation
Level of available resources

Early
Detection

Basic

Limited

Enhanced

Maximal

Public
education and
awareness

• Development of culturally
sensitive, linguistically
appropriate local education
programs for target populations
to teach value of early
detection, breast cancer risk
factors, and breast health
awareness (education +
self-examination)

• Culturally and
linguistically appropriate
targeted outreach/
education encouraging
CBE for age groups at
higher risk administered
at district/provincial
level using health care
providers in the field

• Regional awareness programs
regarding breast health
linked to general health and
women’s health programs

• National awareness
campaigns regarding breast
health using media

Detection
methods

• Clinical history and CBE

• Diagnostic breast US ±
diagnostic mammography
in women with positive
CBE

• Mammographic screening
every 2 years in women ages
50–69a

• Consider annual
mammographic screening in
women ages 40 and older

• Mammographic screening
of target groupa
Evaluation
goal

• Breast health awareness
regarding value of early
detection in improving breast
cancer outcome

• Downsizing of
symptomatic disease

• Consider mammographic
• Other imaging technologies
screening every 12–18 months
as appropriate for high-risk
in women ages 40–49a
groupsb
• Downsizing and/or
downstaging of asymptomatic
disease in women in highest
yield target groups

• Downsizing and/
or downstaging of
asymptomatic disease in
women in all risk groups

Source: Anderson and others 2008. Used with permission.
Note: CBE = clinical breast examination; US = ultrasound; ± = with or without.
a. Target group selection for mammographic screening should consider breast cancer demographics and resource constraints within the population.
b. Magnetic resonance imaging is more sensitive than mammography in detecting tumors in asymptomatic women who have an inherited susceptibility to breast cancer.

mammograms for image and interpretation quality.
Mammography requires high-quality instrumentation
and specially trained radiologists, whose performance
varies substantially, depending on training and level
of experience; screening efficacy is reduced if mammograms are of inferior quality, or if those who read
mammograms are not adequately trained and assessed
on an ongoing basis (Barlow and others 2004; Ichikawa
and others 2010).
Ensuring the quality of imaging and interpretation
is challenging in LMICs, due to the need to purchase
machines, ensure ongoing quality control, and maintain
screening registers.
Many organizations and investigators, including the
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
(IARC 2008) and the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force,
have reviewed the evidence for the efficacy of screening
with mammography (Nelson and others 2009). The
evidence comes mainly from six trials, in which women
were randomized to periodic mammographic screening
or no screening. Based on these trials, IARC estimated a
reduction in breast cancer of about 25 percent in women
ages 50–69 years and about 19 percent in women ages

50

Cancer

40–49 years. The results were consistent across studies
in older women but were inconsistent for women in
their forties.
Reviewing the same trials, the U.S. Preventive Services
Task Force concluded that the mortality benefit is
more consistent among younger women than previously
described; 15 percent for ages 39–49; 14 percent for
ages 50–59; and 32 percent for ages 60–69 (Nelson and
others 2009). The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
withdrew a prior recommendation for routine screening
for women ages 39–49 who are at average risk, based on
the larger number of women who need to be screened
to save a life (1,904 for ages 39–49; 1,339 for ages 50–59;
and 377 for ages 60–69) (table 3.2) (U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force 2009).
The positive predictive value of screening mammography increases with age. Premenopausal women
tend to have denser breast tissue and a higher rate of
benign lesions than postmenopausal women, resulting in greater difficulty in detecting lesions and lower
sensitivity and specificity (that is, a higher rate of falsepositives). Furthermore, the incidence of breast cancer
increases with age in most populations.

Table 3.2 Pooled Relative Risk for Breast Cancer
Mortality from Mammographic Screening Trials for
Women Ages 39–74 Years

Age
(years)

Trials
included

Relative risk for
breast cancer
mortality (95%
credible interval)

NNI to prevent
one breast cancer
death (95%
credible interval)

39–49

8

0.85 (0.75–0.96)

1904 (929–6378)

50–59

6

0.86 (0.75–0.99)

1339 (322–7455)

60–69

2

0.68 (0.54–0.87)

377 (230–1050)

70–74

1

1.12 (0.73–1.72)

—

Source: Nelson and others 2009.
Note: NNI = number needed to invite to screening; — = not available.

Although it may be less cost effective to screen women
in their forties than women ages 50 and older, a relatively
high proportion of women with breast cancers in LMICs
are ages 40–49, complicating the decision making about
the parameters of a screening program. Without screening, the largest age cohort of breast cancer patients will
be missed and many women will continue to present for
treatment with more advanced stage disease.
Some groups question whether the demonstrated
mortality benefit of mammographic screening might be
outweighed by the risk of harm through false-positive
studies or the potential for overtreatment of biologically
favorable early-stage disease (Baum 2013; Gotzsche and
others 2012). Informed consent should be provided to
women so that they have an appropriate understanding
of the potential risks as well as benefits of mammographic screening (Thornton 2014).
Standard practice in HICs is two-view mammography, in which the breast is imaged in two planes
(MLO–medial/lateral oblique, CC–craniocaudal),
which allows a more accurate reading. However, in
older randomized trials, the quality of single-view
mammograms was nearly equivalent to that of twoview mammograms. In LMICs with limited resources,
consideration can be given to single-view mammography, if doing so will increase the coverage and the
screening interval can be extended beyond one or
two years. In women ages 50–69, screening every
33 months was as efficacious as screening every 18–24
months; in women ages 40–49, the reduction in
mortality was inversely related to the screening interval (Breast Screening Frequency Trial Group 2002).
When allocating limited resources for mammographic
screening, it is more cost effective to screen a higher
proportion of women less frequently than to screen a

smaller proportion more frequently. The availability
and cost of x-ray film may also limit the availability of
screening in LMICs; digital mammography may provide an alternative, if costs are reduced to affordable
levels.
Because mammographic screening is expensive and
requires considerable infrastructure, consideration has
been given in LMICs to screening with clinical breast
examination (CBE) and breast self-examination (BSE).
Clinical Breast Examination
CBE is a basic tool in clinical management of breast
cancer. However, no randomized trials to assess CBE
alone as a screening tool have yet been completed,
while the evidence from observational studies is
inconsistent. A case-control study in Japan suggested
that breast cancer deaths were reduced among asymptomatic women who underwent CBE screening (odds
ratio = 0.56) (Kanemura and others 1999). A second
Japanese study reported significantly greater reductions in the age-adjusted death rate from breast cancer
in areas with high rates of screening coverage (principally by physical examination), compared with areas
where coverage was not established (Kuroishi and
others 2000). An early clinical trial conducted by the
Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York demonstrated that a combination of mammography and
CBE reduced the risk of breast cancer mortality; many
of the tumors in the screened group were detected
by CBE but not by mammography (Chu, Smart, and
Tarone 1988). However, more recent randomized
trials compared the combination of mammography
and CBE with mammography alone, and the two
approaches appeared to have equivalent outcomes
(IARC 2008). As a result, IARC and the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force concluded that the evidence for
the efficacy of CBE in reducing mortality from breast
cancer is “inadequate” and “insufficient,” respectively
(U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 2009).
Most of the evidence for the efficacy of CBE has come
from studies in HICs, where women typically present
with relatively small tumors. CBE has been advocated for
LMICs for several reasons. CBE may be more efficacious
in LMICs, where women tend to present with larger
tumors; CBE is less expensive than mammography
because it can be performed by trained health workers
who are not physicians and requires less equipment than
mammography. A recent study of 1,179 screened women
in Jakarta, Indonesia, compared the use of mammography and CBE in a previously unscreened population and
identified 14 breast cancers. Of the 14 cancers, 13 were
detected by CBE (Kardinah and others 2014).

Breast Cancer

51

If CBE is used for screening breast cancer in LMICs,
it should be done in such a way that its effectiveness
can be evaluated. A randomized trial in the Philippines
was unsuccessful because too few women with positive
findings on CBE consented to further diagnostic tests to
determine if the findings reflected a malignant or benign
finding (Pisani and others 2006). A randomized trial
of CBE and visual inspection of the cervix by specially
trained women with a tenth-grade education is underway in Mumbai, India. Preliminary results show more
breast cancers are being detected at early stages (stages 0,
I, or II) in the screening group (62 percent) than in the
control group (44 percent), but breast cancer mortality
results are not yet available (Mittra and others 2010).
In addition to assessments of its efficacy—sensitivity,
shifted stage distribution, and reduction in breast cancer
mortality—all such efforts to evaluate the usefulness
of CBE should include a measure of its specificity. If
large numbers of lesions detected by CBE are found
not to be cancerous on further evaluation, this puts a
heavy burden on local diagnostic facilities. In addition,
if many women undergo unnecessary breast biopsies,
this may not be acceptable, either to the women targeted
for screening or to policy makers who allocate scarce
resources.
CBE accuracy depends on the skill of providers, the
definition of proper techniques, and the type of training
received. Strategies for providing routine feedback to
health care providers about the accuracy of their examinations as determined on final diagnostic work-up are
integral to successful CBE programs.
Breast Self-Examination
The aim of BSE is to detect asymptomatic breast conditions and should be distinguished from programs that
promote early treatment of symptomatic breast cancer.
BSE is the systematic search performed regularly by the
women themselves for a lump or other change in the
breast that is suggestive of cancer. In formal BSE training, a woman receives instruction in the four elements
of the examination: visual inspection of the breasts in a
mirror to look for asymmetry and dimpling; palpation
in both the standing and lying positions with the arm
above the head, using a circular motion with the pads of
the three middle fingers, with systematic coverage of the
entire breast and axilla; squeezing of the nipple to detect
discharge; and monthly BSE practice.
Most evidence for the efficacy of BSE comes from two
randomized trials from Saint Petersburg (Semiglazov
and others 1999) and Shanghai (Thomas and others
2002). In both studies, women were randomized to
either an intervention group that received instruction in
BSE and periodic reminders to practice the procedure or

52

Cancer

to a control group that received no such education and
no formal breast cancer screening. Mortality from breast
cancer was unchanged by BSE instruction in these trials.
Both the IARC working group and the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force concluded that the efficacy of BSE
is unproven (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 2009).
However, it has been questioned if the negative findings
of these BSE trials are relevant to LMICs, where women
commonly present with large (> 4 cm) cancers at initial
diagnosis. In the Shanghai trial, women in the control
group were not taught BSE but nonetheless were largely
successful in finding cancers when they were still small,
that is, where 45 percent of the cancers were found as
in situ or T1 invasive cancers measuring less than 2 cm
(Thomas and others 2002). These favorable findings
among the untrained control women from Shanghai
stand in stark contrast to regions of India, where
76 percent of women present with locally advanced or
metastatic (stage III or IV) disease at initial presentation
(Chopra 2001). In this latter setting, the actual benefit of
BSE training could potentially be much greater.
It remains unknown whether BSE could reduce
mortality from breast cancer in populations in LMICs.
It is not unreasonable to advocate that BSE be used as a
screening tool in these settings, either alone or in combination with CBE. No new trials of BSE alone have been
undertaken, but BSE instruction has been included in
some of the studies of CBE. The IARC working group
recommended randomized trials of BSE in conjunction
with mammography. In LMICs where mammographic
screening cannot be provided at least every two years, it
may be particularly useful to teach BSE.
Any introduction of BSE should be accompanied by
evaluation of its efficacy, including quantification of the
benign lesions that must be evaluated. In both of the
completed BSE trials, many more benign breast lesions
were detected in the groups that received BSE instruction than in the control groups.
Breast Awareness Education
Programs to promote early diagnosis and treatment of
symptomatic breast cancer are not screening programs,
because they are not designed to detect asymptomatic
lesions. Their purpose is to encourage women who have
symptoms suggestive of breast cancer to seek medical
care. Women can be educated to detect suspicious
changes in their breasts and empowered to overcome
social barriers that might prevent them from seeking
care. Breast self-awareness programs should not be initiated unless adequate diagnostic and treatment facilities
are available. And the programs should be established in
such a way that they can be evaluated to determine their
effectiveness.

Guidelines on Diagnosis
Diagnosis is a critical and often overlooked aspect of
breast cancer management. Two key components of
diagnosis are confirmation of a cancer diagnosis based
on clinical evaluation and tissue sampling, and testing
with the imaging and tumor markers needed for treatment planning (table 3.3).

Clinical Evaluation
A patient’s history of general health and of factors specific to breast disease provides important information
for clinical assessment of breast disease and comorbid conditions that might influence therapy choices.
Complete physical examination performed in conjunction with CBE provides guidance on the extent of

Table 3.3 Diagnosis Resource Allocation
Level of available resources
Diagnosis
Clinical

Basic
• History
• Physical examination
• CBE

Limited
• US-guided FNAB
of sonographically
suspicious axillary nodes
• SLN biopsy with blue dyea

• Tissue sampling for cancer
diagnosis (cytologic or
histologic) prior to initiation
of treatment
Imaging and
lab tests

See footnote b

Enhanced

Maximal

• Image guided breast
sampling
• Preoperative needle
localization under mammo
and/or US guidance
• SLN biopsy using
radiotracera

• Diagnostic breast US

• Diagnostic mammography

• Plain chest and skeletal
radiography

• Specimen radiography

• Liver US

• Cardiac function
monitoring

• Blood chemistry profileb

• Bone scan, CT scan

• PET scan, MIBI
scan, breast MRI,
BRCA 1/2 testing
• Mammographic
double reading

• CBCb
Pathology

• Pathology diagnosis obtained
for every breast lesion by any
available sampling procedure
• Pathology report containing
appropriate diagnostic
and prognostic/predictive
information to include tumor
size, lymph node status,
histologic type, and tumor
grade

• Determination of ER
status by IHCc
• Determination of margin
status, DCIS content,
presence of LVI
• Frozen section or touch
prep SLN analysisd

• Measurement of HER2/
neu overexpression or
gene amplificationd
• Determination of PR
status by IHC

• IHC staining of
sentinel nodes for
cytokeratin to detect
micrometastases
• Pathology double
reading
• Gene profiling tests

• Process to establish hormone
receptor status possibly
including empiric assessment
of response to therapyc
• Determination and reporting
of TNM stage
Source: Anderson and others 2008. Used with permission.
Note: BRCA1/2 = breast cancer genes 1 and 2; CBC = complete blood count; CBE = clinical breast examination; CT = computed tomography; DCIS = ductal carcinoma in situ;
ER = estrogen receptor; FNAB = fine-needle aspiration biopsy; HER2 = human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; IHC = immunohistochemistry; LVI = lymphovascular invasion;
mammo = mammography; MIBI = methoxy-isobutyl-isonitrile; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging; PET = positron emission tomography; PR = progesterone receptor; SLN = sentinel
lymph node; TNM = malignant tumor system; US = ultrasound.
a. The use of SLN biopsy requires clinical and laboratory validation of the SLN technique.
b. Systemic chemotherapy requires blood chemistry profile and CBC testing for safety. When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests also should be provided.
c. ER testing by IHC is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is cost effective when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at the basic level, IHC
testing of ER status should be provided.
d. If the costs associated with trastuzumab were substantially lower, trastuzumab would be used as a limited-level therapy. In this case, measurement of HER2/neu overexpression
and/or gene amplification would need to be available at the limited level to properly select patients for this highly effective but expensive HER2/neu-targeted biological therapy.

Breast Cancer

53

disease, the presence of metastatic disease, and the ability
to tolerate more aggressive therapeutic regimens.
Diagnostic Imaging
Breast imaging, initially with ultrasound and at higher
resource levels with diagnostic mammography, improves
preoperative diagnostic assessment and permits imageguided needle sampling of suspicious lesions. Imaging
also provides important information about the extent of
disease, which helps determine whether breast conservation (lumpectomy followed by radiation therapy) is an
option or mastectomy is required. Ultrasound is particularly valuable as an adjunct to CBE in providing detail
on the size and extent of masses and thickenings, which
helps to distinguish benign cysts from solid lesions and
characterizes the shape and growth pattern of lesions.
Diagnostic mammography, while helpful for breast
conservation therapy, is not mandatory in LMICs when
these resources are lacking. However, where screening
mammography is common and where nonpalpable,
noninvasive cancers are often diagnosed, diagnostic
mammography is critical for determining the extent
of disease and properly selecting patients for breast
conservation surgery versus mastectomy (Theriault and
others 2013).
Tissue Sampling
Needle biopsy is preferred to surgical excision for initial diagnosis of the most suspicious breast lesions; if
resource limitations preclude this option, then surgical
excision is necessary. Mastectomy should never be used
as a method of tissue diagnosis. Whether the tissue
is obtained by needle sample or surgical excision, the
sample must be processed and then evaluated by a
pathologist to determine whether the disease is malignant or benign, and invasive or noninvasive (Shyyan and
others 2008).
Tumor Markers
Once a cancer diagnosis is made, additional testing provides information on which to base pharmacotherapy
choices. For example, tamoxifen and aromatase inhibitors are affordable generic oral medications that are
quite effective in the management of ER-positive cancers
with relatively manageable side effects, but these agents
are relatively ineffective against ER-negative cancers
(Howell and others 1998). The availability of ER testing
is critical to proper selection of cancer therapy when
endocrine therapies are available. Standard testing is
based on immunohistochemical (IHC) methods, where
quality assessment of testing methodology is important
to avoid false-negative results (Hammond and others
2010; Masood and others 2008).

54

Cancer

HER2/neu oncogene testing provides information
on the relative aggressiveness of the cancer (HER2/
neu-positive cancers are more aggressive), as well as on
the likely drug sensitivity of the cancer (Yoo and others
2012). However, the most effective drug for HER2/
neu-positive cancers is trastuzumab, which is unaffordable in most regions. Less expensive therapies are under
investigation (Pinto and others 2013).
Guidelines on Treatment
Surgery
The modified radical mastectomy is the mainstay
of treatment of local and regional (nodal) disease
at the basic level of breast health care for early-stage
(table 3.4) and late-stage (table 3.5) disease (Anderson
and others 2008). The operation is not technically difficult, although surgeons must be trained to remove the
breast and dissect axillary nodes properly (Thorat and
others 2008).
Radiation Therapy
At increasing resource levels, the availability of radiation
therapy allows for consideration of breast-conserving
therapy, postmastectomy chest wall radiation, and
palliation of painful or symptomatic metastases (see
tables 3.4 and 3.5). Although radiation therapy requires
significant infrastructure and can be cost limiting in
improving treatment, the establishment of a radiation
facility can be an important first step in creating an
oncology center of excellence in an LMIC (Bese and
others 2008).
Systemic Pharmacotherapy
Although surgery and radiation address local disease in the breast and regional disease in the lymph
node beds, systemic therapy addresses microscopic
disease elsewhere that can become metastases. When
patients die from breast cancer, the cause is widespread metastatic disease. It is pharmacotherapy that
ultimately improves breast cancer survival rates, since
this is the only treatment directed at systemic disease. Pharmacotherapies for breast cancer consist of
endocrine (hormonal) therapy, cytotoxic chemotherapy, and biological targeted (antibody) therapies (see
tables 3.4 and 3.5).
• Endocrine therapy requires relatively few specialized resources, but it requires knowledge of hormone receptor status to identify the patients most
likely to benefit. For ER-positive cancers, tamoxifen
and aromatase inhibitors are oral drugs taken daily
for five years or more that can be dispensed from

Table 3.4 Treatment Resource Allocation for Stage I and Stage II Disease
Level of available resources
Treatment
Stage I

Basic
Local-regional
treatment

Surgery

Limited

Enhanced
a

Modified radical
mastectomy

Breast-conserving surgery
SLN biopsy with blue dyeb

Radiation therapy

Systemic
treatment

Classic CMFc, AC, EC, or
FACc
Oophorectomy in
premenopausal women
Tamoxifend

Biological therapy
Stage II

Local-regional
treatment

Systemic
treatment

SLN biopsy using radiotracer
Breast reconstruction surgery
Breast-conserving wholebreast irradiation as part of
breast-conserving therapya

Chemotherapy

Endocrine therapy

Maximal
b

Taxanes

Growth factors
Dose-dense
chemotherapy

Aromatase inhibitors LH-RH
agonists
See footnote e

Trastuzumab for treating
HER2/neu-positive diseasee

Surgery

Modified radical
mastectomy

Breast-conserving surgerya
SLN biopsy with blue dyeb

SLN biopsy using radiotracerb
Breast reconstruction surgery

Radiation therapy

See footnote f

Postmastectomy irradiation
of chest wall and regional
nodes for high-risk casesf

Breast-conserving wholebreast irradiation as part of
breast-conserving therapya

Chemotherapy

Classic CMFc,
AC, EC, or FACc

Taxanes

Endocrine therapy

Oophorectomy in
premenopausal women
Tamoxifend

Aromatase inhibitors LH-RH
agonists

Biological therapy

See footnote e

Growth factors
Dose-dense
chemotherapy

Trastuzumab for treating
HER2/neu-positive diseasee

Source: Anderson and others 2008. Used with permission.
Note: AC = doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide; CMF = cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and 5-fluorouracil; EC = epirubicin and cyclophosphamide; FAC = 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and
cyclophosphamide; HER2/neu = human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; LH-RH = luteinizing hormone-releasing hormone; SLN = sentinel lymph node.
a. Breast-conserving surgery can be provided as a limited-level resource but requires radiation therapy. If breast-conserving radiation is unavailable, then patients should be transferred to a
higher-level facility for postlumpectomy radiation.
b. The use of SLN biopsy requires clinical and laboratory validation of the SLN technique.
c. Systemic chemotherapy requires blood chemistry profile and complete blood count testing for safety. When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests also should be
provided.
d. ER testing by IHC is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is cost effective when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at the basic level, then IHC testing of ER
status also should be provided.
e. If the costs associated with trastuzumab were substantially lower, trastuzumab would be used as a limited-level resource. In this case, measurement of HER2/neu overexpression and/or gene
amplification would need to be available at the limited level to select patients properly for this highly effective but expensive HER2/neu-targeted biological therapy.
f. Chest wall and regional lymph node irradiation substantially decreases the risk of postmastectomy local recurrence. If available, it should be used as a basic-level resource.

pharmacies without special infrastructure and are
considered very safe. Endocrine therapy could be
given to all breast cancer patients, but it would
be a waste of resources since it is only effective
against ER-positive cancers. IHC methods involve
special tissue-staining techniques with labeling
antibodies, which requires pathology laboratory
infrastructure; quality control is quite important to

testing accuracy. Alternative simplified techniques
for ER testing are of significant interest but remain
experimental.
• Systemic cytotoxic chemotherapy is effective in
most biologic subtypes of breast cancer. It is particularly important in the management of ER-negative
cancers but is resource intensive. Chemotherapy
has significant side effects that must be managed

Breast Cancer

55

Table 3.5 Treatment Resource Allocation for Locally Advanced and Metastatic Disease
Level of available resources
Treatment

Basic

Locally
advanced

Local-regional
treatment

Systemic treatment
(Adjuvant and
neoadjuvant)

Local-regional
treatment

Systemic treatment

Enhanced

Surgery

Modified radical
mastectomy

Radiation therapy

See footnote a

Chemotherapy

Preoperative
chemotherapy with AC,
EC, FAC, or CMFb

Taxanes

Endocrine therapy

Oophorectomy in
premenopausal women
Tamoxifenc

Aromatase inhibitors
LH-RH agonists

Biological therapy

Metastasic and
recurrent

Limited

Surgery

Maximal

Breast-conserving surgery
Breast reconstruction
surgery
Postmastectomy
irradiation of chest
wall and regional
nodesa

See footnote d

Breast-conserving wholebreast irradiation as part
of breast-conserving
therapy
Growth factors
Dose-dense
chemotherapy

Trastuzumab for treating
HER2/neu-positive
diseased

Total mastectomy
for ipsilateral breast
tumor recurrence after
breast-conserving
surgery

Radiation therapy

Palliative radiation
therapy

Chemotherapy

Classic CMFb
Anthracycline
monotherapy or in
combinationb

Sequential single agent or
combination chemotherapy:
Trastuzumab
Lapatinib

Bevacizumab

Endocrine therapy

Oophorectomy in
premenopausal women
Tamoxifenc

Aromatase inhibitors

Fulvestrant

Biological therapy

Nonopioid and opioid
analgesics and
symptom management

Bisphosphonates

Growth
factors

Source: Anderson and others 2008. Used with permission.
Note: Treatment resource allocation table for locally advanced, metastatic (stage IV), and recurrent breast cancer. AC = doxorubicin and cyclophosphamide; CMF = cyclophosphamide, methotrexate,
and 5-fluorouracil; EC = epirubicin and cyclophosphamide; FAC = 5-fluorouracil, doxorubicin, and cyclophosphamide; HER2/neu = human epidermal growth factor receptor 2; LH-RH = luteinizing
hormone-releasing hormone.
a. Chest wall and regional lymph node irradiation substantially decreases the risk of postmastectomy local recurrence. If available, it should be used as a basic-level resource.
b. Systemic chemotherapy requires blood chemistry profile and complete blood count testing for safety. When chemotherapy is available at the basic level, these tests should be provided.
c. Estrogen receptor testing by immunohistochemistry (IHC) is preferred for establishing hormone receptor status and is cost effective when tamoxifen is available. When tamoxifen is available at
the basic level, then IHC testing of estrogen receptor status should be provided.
d. If the costs associated with trastuzumab were substantially lower, trastuzumab would be used at a limited level. In this case, measurement of HER2/neu overexpression and/or gene amplification
would need to be available at the limited level to properly select patients for this highly effective but expensive HER2/neu-targeted biological therapy.

effectively. Correct drug selection is based on the
extent or stage of the cancer and on tumor markers
that can predict likely drug sensitivity. Proper drug
dosing is important and must be individualized to
the patient’s body mass index; the dosage should be

56

Cancer

sufficiently high to provide optimal effects on the
cancer but as low as possible to minimize adverse
events. Proper management of these agents is critical; they must be handled under sterile conditions,
they must be properly and safely administered, and

health care workers should not be directly exposed to
these agents.
• Biological targeted therapies use monoclonal antibodies to control disease. HER2 neu-targeted therapy with trastuzumab is very effective in tumors
that overexpress the HER2/neu oncogene, but cost
largely prevents the use of this treatment in LMICs
(Eniu and others 2008); a standard one-year course
of treatment in the United States is approximately
US$100,000. It remains unclear whether generic
forms of trastuzumab will be available in the future.

IMPLEMENTATION OF BHGI GUIDELINES:
AN EARLY DETECTION MODEL
Before an LMIC initiates a breast cancer control program or evaluates existing programs, careful assessment
of the local situation is needed. This assessment consists
of three parts:
• Breast cancer problem in the population
• Existing infrastructure that will be utilized for the
program
• Social and cultural barriers to women’s participation
in the program
Assessing the Breast Cancer Problem
A realistic estimate of the number of women with breast
cancer in the population in which screening is proposed
is an essential part of the planning process; the lower the
prevalence, the higher the number of women who have
to be screened to detect cases and prevent deaths.
Estimating the frequency of breast cancer in LMICs
can be a challenge and may require using less than ideal
methods. The ideal situation is where the number of
women in the target screening population is known
and a reliable population-based cancer registry covers a
substantial portion of the population. These elements,
in conjunction with information from countries with
well-developed breast cancer screening programs, would
support a reasonable estimate of expected impact. In
countries with poorer enumeration of the target population or cancer registration, more extrapolation is
involved; estimates of breast cancer burden and expected
benefit become less reliable but still useful. For example, incidence rates for populations that may be similar
to populations without registries are found in Cancer
Incidence in Five Continents (Curado and others 2007).
Accurate mortality rates can serve as good measures
of the extent of the breast cancer problem. However,
mortality rates can be misleading if the population
size is not accurately enumerated, if many deaths are

unreported, or if certification of the cause of death is
not accurately recorded. In the absence of adequate
information on the population to be screened, reviews
of death certificates can be useful. The number of deaths
certified as due to breast cancer during specific years can
be obtained to provide a rough estimate of the number
of annual breast cancer deaths in the population. In
addition, the proportion of all deaths due to breast cancer can be calculated and compared with the proportion
of deaths from other causes. If breast cancer is a small
problem relative to other preventable causes of death,
then a screening program may not be warranted, but if
breast cancer deaths constitute a relatively high proportion of preventable deaths, this information can help to
justify the costs of screening.
A review of hospital records can be useful in assessing
the magnitude of the problem. If a single hospital serves
all cancer patients in a defined population, then the
hospital records can be reviewed to estimate the number
of cases to be expected annually. A record review can
provide an indication of the importance of breast cancer
relative to other cancers in the population and relative to
other reasons for hospitalization. If admissions for breast
cancer constitute a relatively high proportion of all preventable causes of admission, or a high proportion of all
admissions for cancer, then a screening program may be
justifiable; if breast cancer is a rare cause of hospitalization, then it may not warrant high prioritization.
The presence of social or financial barriers that keep
women from accessing services will limit the effectiveness of a screening program; it will be important to
consider initiatives to overcome such barriers.
Assessing the magnitude of the problem before implementing a screening program also includes determining
the disease stage distribution at diagnosis. This information would be found in population-based cancer
registries or hospital-based registries. In the absence of
cancer registries, the records in clinics, hospitals, and
pathology laboratories can be reviewed. If a high proportion of breast cancers are diagnosed at advanced stages,
then a screening program, or an educational program
to encourage earlier diagnosis of symptomatic breast
cancers, could have a substantial impact on the burden.
Conversely, if a high proportion of breast cancers are
already being diagnosed at early stages, then screening
programs based on BSE, and probably also on CBE, are
unlikely to have a large impact on mortality or morbidity.
Assessing the Infrastructure for Screening,
Diagnosis, and Treatment
Mammography, the only screening method of proven
efficacy, serves as an example for assessing infrastructure.

Breast Cancer

57

For a mammographic screening program to result in
earlier detection of breast cancers in the population in
LMICs and elsewhere, six elements need to function
adequately:
• Means to recruit enough women in the target population to have a meaningful impact on the breast
cancer burden
• Facilities to ensure high-quality mammograms
• Sufficient number of radiologists who can properly
interpret mammograms in a timely manner
• Means to recontact women with suspicious findings
and ensure that they come to facilities for further
evaluation in a timely fashion
• Adequate diagnostic facilities and trained pathologists to provide timely and accurate tissue diagnoses
• Sufficient facilities and personnel to provide timely
and appropriate treatment
Regardless of the screening modality used—BSE,
CBE, or screening mammography—gaps in this system
at any level must be identified and addressed before a
program of early detection is established.
Assessing Social and Cultural Barriers
Women in LMICs may be unaware of breast cancer, or
they may have misconceptions about its nature or curability or have fatalistic attitudes toward diseases in general (Yip and others 2008). Under such circumstances,
programs to enhance public awareness of breast cancer
and to teach that breast cancer outcomes are improved
through early detection are critical to improving participation in early detection programs, regardless of the
selected methods for early detection.
Cultural barriers to participation need to be identified and strategies developed to overcome them. These
barriers may include the attitudes of women as well as
their husbands; in some cultures, women must obtain
their husbands’ permission to seek medical services.
Efforts to empower women and educate men may be
required for programs to succeed. Cultural and social
barriers are highly specific to different countries, religions, and ethnic groups and cannot be comprehensively
reviewed here. However, an example illustrates how
they may be addressed. In a survey in the Palestinian
Authority (Azaiza and others 2010), women were more
likely to undergo screening mammography if they were
less religious, if they described fewer personal barriers
to examinations, and if they indicated a lower degree of
cancer fatalism.
Women who consented to CBE had a higher perceived effectiveness of CBE and described lower levels

58

Cancer

of cancer fatalism. Muslim women were half as likely
as Christian women to participate in CBE screening.
Women were more likely to perform BSE if they were
more highly educated, resided in cities, were Christian,
were less religious, and had a first-degree relative with
breast cancer. These results suggest that participation
in screening might be improved by recruiting religious
leaders as spokespersons for early detection and by staffing screening clinics with women physicians and nurses
sensitive to the needs of conservative Muslim women
who must remain covered in public.
Women who are correctly diagnosed and properly
treated for early-stage breast cancer can survive the
disease and can organize breast cancer survivor groups,
such as Reach for Recovery (figure 3.3). Such groups can
play a vital role in educating the public about the value
of early detection and in providing newly diagnosed
women with practical and emotional support (Ashbury
and others 1998). Survivor groups can organize into
political advocacy groups that have a real and positive
impact on health care policy or national cancer research
agendas (Schmidt 2009; Visco 2007).
Identifying Target Groups
Identifying a target group for screening in LMICs
should be based on the burden of disease in the population, the potential benefit from screening, and available
resources (Humphrey and others 2002). Other than the
small subset of women at very high risk of developing
breast cancer due to genetic predisposition, it is very difficult to predict which women are destined to develop
breast cancer. Although women with BRCA (breast
cancer gene) mutations generally have a strong family
history of breast and/or ovarian cancer, family history

Figure 3.3 Synergistic Relationship between Public
Participation and Health Care Delivery in Downstaging
Breast Cancer and Improving Outcomes
Public Participation

Health care delivery

Awareness

Early detection

Advocacy

Diagnosis

Survivorship

Treatment

Source: Harford and others 2011. Used with permission.

is not a particularly good tool for selecting women for
screening, since approximately 80 percent of breast cancers occur in women who lack a known family history
of breast cancer. As a result, the only two risk factors
used for determining candidacy for screening are gender and age.
In Western countries, breast cancer incidence
increases sharply with age until the usual age at menopause and then increases more slowly. In LMICs, incidence increases with age until menopause but then
either continues to increase less steeply with age than
in Western countries, levels off, or decreases with age
(Freedman and others 2006). This phenomenon is the
result of an aging and growing population (Chia and
others 2005; Wong, Cowling, and others 2007); over
time, the age-specific incidence curves for LMICs are
expected to more closely approximate those of Western
countries (Yip and others 2008).
In LMICs where incidence rates in women ages 50
years and older are beginning to increase with age, the
prevalence of the disease in the population may have
approached a level at which establishing screening programs will be cost effective.

Considering Coverage and Impact
Coverage of the target population is also important. If
screening is efficacious in reducing mortality from breast
cancer, but only a small proportion of the women in the
target population receives the service, then the impact of
the screening program on mortality in the population
will be minimal. The following simple formula illustrates the impact (Thomas and others 2013):
Impact = Efficacy × Coverage
If we assume that mammograms reduce mortality
from breast cancer by 25 percent, and if 40 percent of
the women in a target population are screened, then the
screening program would be expected to reduce mortality in the target population by 10 percent (0.25 × 0.40
= 0.10). Mammographic screening programs in LMICs
should be designed in such a way that the proportion of
women in the target population who are screened can be
maximized.

COST-EFFECTIVE INTERVENTIONS IN LMICs
The BHGI resource-adapted guidelines provide a
sound foundation for creating intervention packages
for early detection (table 3.1), diagnosis (table 3.3),
and treatment by disease stage (tables 3.4 and 3.5)

at each of BHGI’s four defined resource levels: Basic,
Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal. By contrast, WHO’s
Choosing Interventions That Are Cost-Effective
(WHO-CHOICE) framework provides a somewhat different and not entirely comparable set of breast cancer
guidelines (Murray and Lopez 1996; Tan-Torres Edejer
and others 2003). WHO-CHOICE was established
as an initiative to provide evidence to policy makers
who must decide on the interventions and programs
that maximize health outcomes for given available
resources, reporting on the costs and effects of a wide
range of health interventions but without direct alignment with current stage-based treatment strategies for
specific diseases.
Whether grounded in the BHGI or WHO-CHOICE
framework, the development of analytical models to identify clinically effective and cost-effective
approaches for improving breast health requires linking resources to interventions and patient outcomes
(Brown and others 2006; Gold and others 1996). The
value-for-money question can be summarized as follows: given the assumed level of resources available
within a given geopolitical area, what administratively
and financially feasible set of interventions has the
greatest favorable impact on health outcomes? This
section reviews and assesses progress to date in identifying cost-effective interventions for breast cancer
in LMICs.
Appraisal of the Literature
As the recent review by Zelle and Baltussen (2013) well
illustrates, substantial variations exist in the precise
purpose, scope, methodology, assumptions, and technical quality of published cost-effectiveness analyses
on breast cancer interventions in LMICs. The following section focuses on a selected set of studies that
yields findings relevant to components of the BHGI
guidelines while paying close attention to important
cost-effectiveness analysis data and methods issues.
Nine of the studies were among 23 selected for detailed
manuscript-quality evaluation by Zelle and Baltussen
and were generally among the highest rated, according
to the authors’ scoring scheme. The studies illustrate
how cost-effectiveness analyses can be carried out in
limited-resource settings.
Salient features and recommendations of these key
studies are summarized in the online annex 3A to
this chapter, tables 3A.1 through 3A.3. We have further mapped the study contexts to BHGI resource
levels and highlighted features following methodological
best-practice guidelines. Here, we focus on the costeffectiveness results. Our conclusions about whether an

Breast Cancer

59

intervention is cost effective were guided throughout by
the following WHO recommendations (WHO 2001):
• If the intervention’s applicable incremental costeffectiveness ratio (ICER) is less than or equal to the
nation’s or region’s GDP per capita, the intervention
is “very cost effective.”
• If the ICER is between one and three times the GDP
per capita, it is “cost effective.”
• If the ICER exceeds three times the GDP per capita,
the intervention is “not cost effective.”

Early Detection
Annual CBEs are very cost effective in Vietnam (Nguyen
and others 2013); biennial mammography screening is
cost effective in Hong Kong SAR, China (Wong, Kuntz,
and others 2007). An analysis examining combinations
of both screening modalities applied to different age
groups in India concluded that several alternative CBE
detection strategies were very cost effective, while the
most efficient among various mammography screening
strategies analyzed (biennial screening for women ages
40–60) was not cost effective (Okonkwo and others
2008). An analysis in the Republic of Korea determined
that the most cost-efficient mammography strategy
(given a prior decision to adopt this modality) is
screening every three years for women ages 45–65 (Lee,
Jeong, and others 2009).
Treatment
In analyses of hormonal adjuvant therapies post-surgery,
Fonseca and others (2009) found that the aromatase
inhibitor anastrozole was cost effective compared with
tamoxifen in a Brazil-based cost-effectiveness analysis.
In Korea, Yang and others (2010) calculated that tamoxifen was very cost effective compared with no hormonal
therapy for hormone receptor-positive patients under a
variety of assumptions; it was very cost effective or cost
effective for hormone receptor-negative patients in only
a subset of cases (for example, when the patient was
stage III and under age 50). A self-described preliminary
cost-effectiveness analysis that excluded certain cost
categories found that a combination of oophorectomy
and tamoxifen was very cost effective compared with
“observation” in a Vietnam-based analysis (Love and
others 2002).
The cost-effectiveness of alternative combination
chemotherapy regimens post-surgery was investigated
for China (Liubao and others 2009) and Korea (Lee,
Jee, and others 2009). Liubao and others found that
substituting docetaxel for doxorubicin in a treatment
package that otherwise included cyclophosphamide

60

Cancer

was cost effective; Lee and others concluded that substituting docetaxel for fluorouracil in another, more
complex regimen was very cost effective. A Chinabased analysis (Bai and others 2012) concluded that
radiation therapy following breast-conserving surgery,
compared with no radiation, was very cost effective
under a wide range of assumptions.
Combination Screening-Treatment Interventions
The four cost-effectiveness analyses summarized in
annex table 3A.3 are all based on the WHO-CHOICE
framework (Tan-Torres Edejer and others 2003); each
examines alternative intervention packages involving
screening and treatment for breast cancer from the perspective of a particular nation or world region. Three of
the papers (Ginsberg and others 2012; Groot and others
2006; Salomon and others 2012) investigate roughly the
same six options: treat only stage I, only stage II, only
stage III, or only stage IV disease; treat all stages; or treat
all stages, plus some variant of a breast screening and/or
educational program (the “extensive program” option).
Zelle and others (2012) evaluated a total of 17 options,
including these six and others that differed largely on
whether screening was by CBE or mammography and
by the age range for screening.
Some modeling assumptions of WHO-CHOICE are
not in alignment with standard stage-based treatment
protocols. For example, two model options assume that
early-stage breast cancer is not treated with chemotherapy when, in practice, most stage II and some stage I
breast cancers do warrant chemotherapy on the basis
of high-level, prospective randomized clinical trials
(Theriault and others 2013). This modeling assumption
could lead to incorrect cost-effectiveness conclusions,
since chemotherapy is among the most expensive of
the required multimodality treatments. WHO-CHOICE
also assumes that lumpectomy and sentinel lymph node
biopsy is the surgery for Stage I and II when, in practice,
breast cancers in LMICs are often too large for breastconserving surgery, and sentinel lymph node biopsy is
often an unavailable technique in these settings such that
complete axillary node dissection is routinely performed
for all invasive cancers.
There is a general convergence in the recommendations, notwithstanding the diversity in geopolitical
setting for these cost-effectiveness analyses. In the
Asian and Sub-Saharan African regions analyzed, Groot
and others (2006) concluded that the extensive program
was very cost effective. For Southeast Asia and SubSaharan Africa, Ginsberg and others (2012) found that
variants of the extensive program (differing by the
assumed fraction of the female population covered)
were all cost effective. Focusing on Brazil, Salomon and

others (2012) calculated that the option of treating all
four stages of breast cancer was very cost effective, while
the extensive program that considered various screening
options was cost effective. For Ghana, Zelle and others
(2012) found that a variant of the extensive program
defined to include biennial CBE screening for women
ages 40–69 was cost effective.

can be evaluated during their early years (McCannon,
Berwick, and Massoud 2007). Methods that have been
employed for program evaluation include observational
studies and randomized trials. Two types of observational studies are comparisons of screening modalities
and assessments of temporal trends in stage of disease.
Randomized trials may be clinic- or population-based.

Implications for Choosing Cost-Effective Breast
Cancer Interventions
Although we agree with Zelle and Baltussen (2013)
that many published analyses of breast cancer interventions in LMICs suffer from serious data or methods limitations, noteworthy exceptions exist, including,
for the most part, the studies included in annex 3A,
tables 3A.1 through 3A.3.
Yet even these conceptually strong studies reveal
another important limitation: the range of intervention
topics examined represents only a fraction of the important questions in prevention and control. This issue
becomes evident by comparing the interventions evaluated in annex 3A, tables 3A.1 through 3A.3, with the range
of BHGI-recommended interventions across the cancer
continuum (tables 3.1, 3.3, 3.4, and 3.5). Although there
are several well-executed cost-effectiveness analyses on
early detection and screening (annex 3A, table 3A.1), we
found no analyses of comparable scope and quality investigating alternative breast cancer diagnostic techniques
and procedures in LMICs. In the treatment domain, we
included a handful of excellent cost-effectiveness analyses
examining alternative chemotherapy regimens, hormonal therapy strategies, or radiation following breast
cancer surgery (annex 3A, table 3A.2); there are no costeffectiveness analyses examining alternative multimodal
adjuvant treatment strategies in LMICs.
The cost-effective analyses focused on combination screening-treatment interventions (annex 3A,
table 3A.3), while limited, do suggest that breast cancer
intervention packages consistent with the BHGI guidelines
could be evaluated through these analyses and tailored
to the resource level that best characterizes the region,
nation, or subnational arena for application.

Comparison of Modalities
A recent study in Indonesia that compared the use
of screening mammography and CBE in a previously
unscreened population found similar efficacy for breast
cancer detection (Kardinah and others 2014). Midwives
and trained lay health workers were trained to perform CBE; volunteers recruited women to come to
the clinics for screening. Among the 1,179 previously
unscreened women, 289 had a suspicious finding on
CBE and/or mammogram (24.5 percent) and required
further work-up: 167 had an abnormal CBE and 191
had an abnormal mammogram. After work-up and
tissue sampling, 14 breast cancers (1.2 percent) were
diagnosed in this unscreened population. Of the 14
cancers, 13 were detected by CBE. Mammography only
identified one additional cancer not found by CBE.
These findings suggest that when starting a screening
program in a previously unscreened population, most
of the prevalent cancers will be found by CBE; mammography adds few additional cancer cases in the initial
screening phase. The study also demonstrates that a
large fraction of women (14 percent in this study) will
require diagnostic evaluation beyond CBE. Screening
programs based on CBE will require significant diagnostic infrastructure based on additional imaging and
tissue sampling.

FIELD STUDIES
The summarized evidence for the efficacy of mammography, CBE, and BSE is based largely on studies
in HICs and upper-middle-income countries, and the
results may not be directly applicable to LMICs. We
recommend strongly that early detection programs in
LMICs be designed in advance in such a way that they

Temporal Trends in Stage of Disease
In Malaysia, almost all diagnosed cancers are treated in
a single referral hospital in the State of Sarawak, with a
population of approximately two million. By reviewing
the medical records of all women with breast cancer at
that hospital before and after an early detection initiative, it was possible to assess the impact of the program
on breast cancer in the population (Devi, Tang, and
Corbex 2007). The intervention consisted of the following elements:
• Training community nurses who worked in rural
clinics to perform CBE and teach BSE
• Circulating pamphlets and posters to motivate
women to go to their nearest clinic at the earliest
signs of a breast problem

Breast Cancer

61

• Instructing community nurses to hold health education talks and discussion groups on early diagnosis
during monthly visits to villages, to teach BSE and
perform CBE
• Strengthening the system for referring women with
signs and symptoms of breast cancer to first-level
hospitals for diagnosis
The proportion of breast cancers that were diagnosed at late stages (stage III or IV) was 77 percent in
1993 before the program began and 37 percent in 1998
after the program began. Since these statistics are for
nearly all women in the population who were treated for
breast cancer, regardless of whether they participated
in the program, they reflect the impact of the program
on the population and suggest that the program had a
positive impact.

Population-Based Randomized Trial
In a cluster randomized trial of CBE and cervical
cancer screening by visual inspection of the cervix
after acetic acid application (VIA) by lay women in
Mumbai (Mittra and others 2010), 20 informal settlements (slums) were randomly allocated to screening or
control groups (10 slums in each group) and women
ages 35–64 years in each slum were considered eligible
for the trial; more than 75,000 women were eligible
for each arm of the study. Women with a tenth-grade
education were trained to perform CBE and VIA; these
trained workers then invited women in the screening
arm of the trial for screening; women in the control
arm received no screening. Three of four rounds of
screening at two-year intervals were completed between
1998 and 2005.
The preliminary results showed that more breast
cancers were detected in the screening arm than in the
control arm (125 versus 87 cases). The proportion of cancers detected at early stages was higher in the screened arm
than the control arm (62 percent versus 44 percent, stage 0,
I, or II disease); this is a difference that achieved statistical
difference by the third cycle of screening (p = 0.004). These
results indicate that CBE performed by specially trained
women may be efficacious in reducing mortality from
breast cancer in the slums of India; the results clearly indicate that continuation of the trial is warranted to provide
direct evidence for a reduction in breast cancer mortality
by CBE. The analyses of the data from this trial include
all women and all breast cancers in the screening group,
whether or not the women were actually screened. The
results indicate the impact of screening as it was actually
implemented in the target population.

62

Cancer

Clinic-Based Cluster Randomized Trial
The National Cancer Institute of Colombia (Instituto
Nacional de Cancerología, or INC; 2006) adapted the
BHGI guidelines for MICs to develop a pilot screening
program in Bogotá. The INC guidelines recommend
screening with annual clinical CBE and mammography
every two years for women ages 50–69. Based on these
guidelines, the INC designed a pilot study to evaluate
opportunistic screening as a programmatic approach
to improve early detection in the country (Murillo
and others 2008). Opportunistic screening is defined as
the systematic offer of CBE and mammography for all
women ages 50–69 who visit health centers on their own,
regardless of motivation. It implies that screening is
clinic-based with no outreach outside the health centers.
The primary objectives of the study are to evaluate the
effect of opportunistic screening on population coverage, to determine the impact of opportunistic screening
on clinical stage at diagnosis, and to identify the basic
requirements for implementing opportunistic screening
within the Colombian health system.
A cluster randomized trial was undertaken with
health centers as the units of randomization. The
screening consisted of recruitment in the clinics and
follow-up by health care assistants (auxiliary nurses,
backed up by registered nurses), CBE performed by
general practitioners, and mammography by radiologists and radiology technicians. Mammography quality
control comprises examination and adjustment of
mammography machines before starting screening,
quality control of mammography films, and evaluation of mammography reading according to international standards. CBE quality control was done by
breast surgeons who periodically visit health centers
to evaluate general practitioners’ practice of CBE and
differences between the diagnoses of the surgeons
and general practitioners are recorded. In the control
group, women who would be eligible for screening
if they had been in the intervention group are given
general information about breast cancer but are not
offered screening.
Women attending the health centers regularly
were assigned to opportunistic screening or no
intervention, according to the random allocation of
their clinic. Because the Colombian health system is
insurance-oriented, randomization was stratified by
health insurance company to control for the effect
of administrative factors on access to screening and
diagnosis. After the enrollment of approximately
12,000 women (about 6,000 per arm), 88.9 percent
and 99.8 percent, respectively, in the opportunistic
screening branch who were offered screening had a

mammogram and a CBE, compared with 11.7 percent
and 5 percent, respectively, of the control women. The
preliminary results show a threefold greater rate of
breast cancer detection in the screened group than in
the control group (15 and 5 cases, respectively) and
a higher proportion of cases at an early stage at diagnosis (13/15 = 86.6 percent versus 3/5 = 60 percent).
Furthermore, the enrollment rate (2.9 patients per
center per day) does not overburden the general practitioners or other clinic staff. At completion of follow-up,
it should be possible to compare the stage of disease at
diagnosis in the women screened compared with the
control arm. It will also be possible to compare the
stage distribution at diagnosis between the two groups,
providing a measure of the impact of the screening
program in the population of women served by the
clinics participating in the trial.

CONCLUSIONS
Population-Based Screening Mammography
Breast cancer screening remains a major area of controversy. In HICs, the debate persists about whether
mammographic screening leads to increased detection
of cancers that would not become significant threats to
a woman’s life in her natural lifetime. Treatment of these
cancers would, by definition, constitute overtreatment.
Arguing against this premise is the fact that in nearly all
countries where age-adjusted breast cancer mortality is
decreasing, screening mammography has been established, for example, Australia, Denmark, Italy, Spain,
and the United States. In contrast, Japan has not implemented screening mammography; despite adequate
treatment standards, breast cancer mortality has plateaued and stabilized, but it has not yet decreased. These
observations are consistent with Cancer Intervention
and Surveillance Modeling Network (CISNET) modeling, which demonstrates synergy between screening and
adjuvant treatment in reducing breast cancer mortality
at the population level (Berry and others 2005); the
modeling suggests that screening mammography will
continue to be important in breast cancer control for the
foreseeable future.
The effectiveness of screening mammography could
be improved if it were possible to identify patients who
did not need immediate treatment, even though a lesion
is found. Although the debate continues regarding the
age at which screening mammography should begin—
age 40 years or age 50 years—new biological research
on cancer progression may identify a patient subgroup
warranting a wait-and-watch strategy.

Clinical Breast Examination as an Early
Detection Tool
Screening mammography is unfeasible in most of the
world, but CBE is a practical option in many LMICs to
provide at least basic breast cancer treatment. Evidence
suggests that in LMICs with rising breast cancer
incidence rates, CBE will help curb the rise in mortality.
What remains unknown is whether CBE, combined
with highly effective treatment, can further curb breast
cancer mortality and lower breast cancer mortality at
the population level. The increasing use of CBE provides
opportunities for research on health care delivery in
limited resource settings.
Diagnosis, Treatment, and Patient Triage
Fine-needle aspiration and core needle biopsy tissue
sampling techniques are necessary for diagnosing palpable lumps and distinguishing between benign and
malignant lesions. However, the key systems questions go beyond selection of a tissue sampling technology. The cost of needles, availability of pathology
services, and patient selection to determine which
patients should be brought to second-level or thirdlevel care centers require systematic assessment of existing resources in a health care delivery system. Before an
early detection strategy is implemented, an assessment
must be made of available resources, missing tools,
and geographic distribution of the patient population,
as well as social and cultural issues that could affect
patient participation.
Once a situation-appropriate early detection, diagnosis, and patient triage strategy is devised, economic
evaluation becomes relevant and important. The evolution of breast health systems will require pilot projects to
determine what systems can work and, in parallel, it will
require new analyses to assess economic impact. It will
be important to proceed in a stepwise, systematic fashion, documenting outcomes, so that successful models
can be adapted and adopted in other settings.
Economic Analyses and the Future of Breast Health
Care in LMICs
The BHGI resource-stratified guideline approach can
be used in priority-setting analyses in LMICs. Costeffectiveness analyses can identify interventions yielding
the greatest gain in health (for example, life years gained
and disability-adjusted life years averted) per dollar
spent, from which practical strategies can be built. We
recognize, however, the limitations in comparing and
extrapolating results from one country to another and

Breast Cancer

63

among groups within the same population, depending
on the methodology, input data, and assumptions in the
studies. A core principle in developing BHGI guidelines
has been to recognize that one size does not fit all.
The WHO-CHOICE framework has brought consistency, but these models are highly simplified compared
with the breast cancer models used in HICs. In each case,
decisions must be made:
• Determining which analytical models to use (WHOCHOICE, CISNET, other micro-simulation models)
• Finding appropriate data that are as faithful as possible to the place of application
• Sorting out at the policy level how to work in concert
with national and local health agencies so the modeling is not only academically sound but practical for
local decision making
The resource-stratified approach, although enormously challenging, identifies key building blocks for
cost-effectiveness analysis models that will translate
resource-conditional breast health guidelines into prioritized intervention strategies.

NOTES
The annex in this chapter is as follows. It is available at http://
dcp-3.org/cancer:
•

Annex 3A: Summary of Salient Features and
Recommendations of the Cost-effectiveness Studies
Relevant to Breast Cancer Screening, Treatment, and
Control in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.

World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income (GNI)
per capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries (LICs): US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries (MICs) are subdivided:
• Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income (UMICs): US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries (HICs): US$12,746 or more
1. Maps and figures in this chapter are based on incidence and mortality estimates for ages 0 to 69, consistent with reporting in all DCP3 volumes. Global cancer
statistics are estimates for the year 2012 and have been
provided by the International Agency for Research on
Cancer from its GLOBOCAN 2012 database. Observable
population-based data were derived from Cancer Incidence
in Five Continents, 10th edition, and for trends over time
from CI5 Plus (http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx).
The discussion of burden (including risk factors), however,

64

Cancer

includes all ages unless otherwise noted. Interventions also
apply to all age groups, except where age ranges or cutoffs
are specified.

REFERENCES
Anderson, B. O., S. Braun, R. W. Carlson, J. R. Gralow, and
M. D. Lagios. 2003. “Overview of Breast Health Care
Guidelines for Countries with Limited Resources.” The
Breast Journal 9 (Suppl. 2): S42–50.
Anderson, B. O., E. Cazap, N. S. El Saghir, C. H. Yip,
H. M. Khaled, and others. 2011. “Optimisation of Breast
Cancer Management in Low-Resource and MiddleResource Countries: Executive Summary of the Breast
Health Global Initiative Consensus, 2010.” The Lancet
Oncology 12 (4): 387–98. doi:S1470-2045(11)70031-6 [pii];
10.1016/S1470-2045(11)70031-6.
Anderson, B. O., R. Shyyan, A. Eniu, R. A. Smith, C. H. Yip,
and others. 2006. “Breast Cancer in Limited-Resource
Countries: An Overview of the Breast Health Global
Initiative 2005 Guidelines.” The Breast Journal 12 (Suppl. 1):
S3–15. doi:10.1111/j.1075-122X.2006.00199.x.
Anderson, B. O., C. H. Yip, R. A. Smith, R. Shyyan, S. F. Sener,
and others. 2008. “Guideline Implementation for Breast
Healthcare in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries:
Overview of the Breast Health Global Initiative Global
Summit 2007.” Cancer 113 (Suppl. 8): 2221–43. doi:10.1002
/cncr.23844.
Ashbury, F. D., C. Cameron, S. L. Mercer, M. Fitch, and
E. Nielsen. 1998. “One-on-One Peer Support and Quality
of Life for Breast Cancer Patients.” Patient Education and
Counseling 35 (2): 89–100. doi:S0738399198000354 [pii].
Azaiza, F., M. Cohen, M. Awad, and F. Daoud. 2010. “Factors
Associated with Low Screening for Breast Cancer in
the Palestinian Authority: Relations of Availability,
Environmental Barriers, and Cancer-Related Fatalism.”
Cancer 116 (19): 4646–55. doi:10.1002/cncr.25378.
Bai, Y., M. Ye, H. Cao, X. Ma, Y. Xu, and others. 2012. “Economic
Evaluation of Radiotherapy for Early Breast Cancer after
Breast-Conserving Surgery in a Health Resource-Limited
Setting.” Breast Cancer Research and Treatment 136 (2):
547–57. doi:10.1007/s10549-012-2268-1.
Barlow, W. E., C. Chi, P. A. Carney, S. H. Taplin, C. D’Orsi,
and others. 2004. “Accuracy of Screening Mammography
Interpretation by Characteristics of Radiologists.” Journal of
the National Cancer Institute 96 (24): 1840–50. doi:10.1093
/jnci/djh333.
Baum, M. 2013. “Harms from Breast Cancer Screening
Outweigh Benefits If Death Caused by Treatment Is
Included.” British Medical Journal 346: f385. doi:10.1136
/bmj.f385.
Berry, D. A., K. A. Cronin, S. K. Plevritis, D. G. Fryback,
L. Clarke, and others. 2005. “Effect of Screening and
Adjuvant Therapy on Mortality from Breast Cancer.”
The New England Journal of Medicine 353 (17): 1784–92.
doi:353/17/1784 [pii]; 10.1056/NEJMoa050518.

Bese, N. S., A. Munshi, A. Budrukkar, A. Elzawawy, and
C. A. Perez. 2008. “Breast Radiation Therapy Guideline
Implementation in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.”
Cancer 113 (Suppl. 8): 2305–14.
Bray, F., J. S. Ren, E. Masuyer, and J. Ferlay. 2013. “Global
Estimates of Cancer Prevalence for 27 Sites in the Adult
Population in 2008.” International Journal of Cancer 132 (5):
1133–45. doi:10.1002/ijc.27711.
Breast Screening Frequency Trial Group. 2002. “The Frequency
of Breast Cancer Screening: Results from the UKCCCR
Randomised Trial. United Kingdom Co-Ordinating
Committee on Cancer Research.” European Journal of
Cancer 38 (11): 1458–64.
Brown, M. L., S. I. Goldie, G. Draisma, J. Harford, and
J. Lipscomb. 2006. “Health Service Interventions for
Cancer Control in Developing Countries.” In Disease
Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd edition,
edited by D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham,
G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and
P. Musgrove, 569–89. Washington, DC: World Bank and
Oxford University Press.
Cardoso, F., N. Bese, S. R. Distelhorst, J. L. Bevilacqua,
O. Ginsburg, and others. 2013. “Supportive Care During
Treatment for Breast Cancer: Resource Allocations in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Breast Health
Global Initiative 2013 Consensus Statement.” Breast 22 (5):
593–605. doi:10.1016/j.breast.2013.07.050.
Chia, K. S., M. Reilly, C. S. Tan, J. Lee, Y. Pawitan, and
others. 2005. “Profound Changes in Breast Cancer
Incidence May Reflect Changes into a Westernized Lifestyle:
A Comparative Population-Based Study in Singapore and
Sweden.” International Journal of Cancer 113 (2): 302–06.
Chopra, R. 2001. “The Indian Scene.” Journal of Clinical
Oncology 19 (Suppl. 18): 106S–111S.
Chu, K. C., C. R. Smart, and R. E. Tarone. 1988. “Analysis of
Breast Cancer Mortality and Stage Distribution by Age
for the Health Insurance Plan Clinical Trial.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 80 (14): 1125–32.
Clarke, M. 2006. “Meta-Analyses of Adjuvant Therapies
for Women with Early Breast Cancer: The Early Breast
Cancer Trialists’ Collaborative Group Overview.” Annals of
Oncology 17 (Suppl. 10): x59–62.
Cleary, J., H. Ddungu, S. R. Distelhorst, C. Ripamonti,
G. M. Rodin, and others. 2013. “Supportive and Palliative
Care for Metastatic Breast Cancer: Resource Allocations
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Breast Health
Global Initiative 2013 Consensus Statement.” Breast 22 (5):
616–27. doi:10.1016/j.breast.2013.07.052.
Curado, M. P., B. Edwards, H. R. Shin, J. H. Storm, J. Ferlay, and
others. 2007. “Cancer Incidence in Five Continents.” Vol. 9,
IARC Scientific Publication 160, IARC Press, Lyon.
Devi, B. C., T. S. Tang, and M. Corbex. 2007. “Reducing
by Half the Percentage of Late-Stage Presentation for
Breast and Cervix Cancer over 4 Years: A Pilot Study of
Clinical Downstaging in Sarawak, Malaysia.” Annals of
Oncology 18 (7): 1172–76. doi:mdm105 [pii]; 10.1093
/annonc/mdm105.

Eniu, A., R. W. Carlson, N. S. El Saghir, J. Bines, N. S. Bese,
and others. 2008. “Guideline Implementation for Breast
Healthcare in Low- and Middle-Income Countries:
Treatment Resource Allocation.” Cancer 113 (Suppl. 8):
2269–81. doi:10.1002 /cncr.23843.
Evans, D. B., T. T. Edejer, T. Adam, and S. S. Lim. 2005. “Methods
to Assess the Costs and Health Effects of Interventions
for Improving Health in Developing Countries.” British
Medical Journal 331 (7525): 1137–40. doi:10.1136
/bmj.331.7525.1137.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, and
others. 2013. “GLOBOCAN 2012 v1.0, Cancer Incidence
and Mortality Worldwide.” IARC CancerBase No. 11
[Internet]. International Agency for Research on Cancer.
http://globocan.iarc.fr.
Fonseca, M., G. T. Araujo, and E. D. Saad. 2009. “CostEffectiveness of Anastrozole, in Comparison with Tamoxifen,
in the Adjuvant Treatment of Early Breast Cancer in Brazil.”
Revista da Associação Médica Brasileira 55 (4): 410–15.
Forouzanfar, M. H., K. J. Foreman, A. M. Delossantos,
R. Lozano, A. D. Lopez, and others. 2011. “Breast and
Cervical Cancer in 187 Countries between 1980 and
2010: A Systematic Analysis.” The Lancet 378 (9801):
1461–84. doi:S0140-6736(11)61351-2 [pii]; 10.1016/
S0140-6736(11)61351-2.
Freedman, L. S., B. K. Edwards, L. A. G. Ries, and
J. L. Young. 2006. Cancer Incidence in Four Member
Countries (Cyprus, Egypt, Israel, and Jordan) of the Middle
East Cancer Consortium (MECC) Compared with US SEER.
NIH Pub. No. 06-5873. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer
Institute.
Ganz, P. A., C. H. Yip, J. R. Gralow, S. R. Distelhorst, K. S. Albain,
and others. 2013. “Supportive Care after Curative Treatment
for Breast Cancer (Survivorship Care): Resource Allocations
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Breast Health
Global Initiative 2013 Consensus Statement.” Breast 22 (5):
606–15. doi:10.1016/j.breast.2013.07.049.
Ginsberg, G. M., J. A. Lauer, S. Zelle, S. Baeten, and R. Baltussen.
2012. “Cost Effectiveness of Strategies to Combat Breast,
Cervical, and Colorectal Cancer in Sub-Saharan Africa and
South East Asia: Mathematical Modelling Study.” British
Medical Journal 344: e614. doi:10.1136/bmj.e614.
Gold, M. R., J. E. Siegel, L. B. Russell, and M. C. Weinstein.
1996. Cost-Effectiveness in Health and Medicine, 1st edition.
New York: Oxford University Press.
Gotzsche, P. C., K. J. Jorgensen, P. H. Zahl, and J. Maehlen.
2012. “Why Mammography Screening Has Not Lived up to
Expectations from the Randomised Trials.” Cancer Causes
Control 23 (1): 15–21. doi:10.1007/s10552-011-9867-8.
Greenlee, R. T., T. Murray, S. Bolden, and P. A. Wingo.
2000. “Cancer Statistics, 2000.” CA: A Cancer Journal for
Clinicians 50 (1): 7–33.
Groot, M. T., R. Baltussen, C. A. Uyl-de Groot, B. O. Anderson,
and G. N. Hortobagyi. 2006. “Costs and Health Effects of
Breast Cancer Interventions in Epidemiologically Different
Regions of Africa, North America, and Asia.” The Breast
Journal 12 (Suppl. 1): S81–90.

Breast Cancer

65

Hammond, M. E., D. F. Hayes, M. Dowsett, D. C. Allred,
K. L. Hagerty, and others. 2010. “American Society of
Clinical Oncology/College of American Pathologists
Guideline Recommendations for Immunohistochemical
Testing of Estrogen and Progesterone Receptors in Breast
Cancer.” Archives of Pathology & Laboratory Medicine 134
(6): 907–22. doi:10.1043/1543-2165-134.6.907.
Harford, J. B., I. V. Otero, B. O. Anderson, E. Cazap,
W. J. Gradishar, and others. 2011. “Problem Solving for
Breast Health Care Delivery in Low and Middle Resource
Countries (LMCs): Consensus Statement from the Breast
Health Global Initiative.” Breast 20 (Suppl. 2): S20–29.
Hisham, A. N., and C. H. Yip. 2003. “Spectrum of Breast
Cancer in Malaysian Women: Overview.” World Journal of
Surgery 27 (8): 921–23.
Howell, A., E. Anderson, R. Blamey, R. B. Clarke, J. M. Dixon,
and others. 1998. “The Primary Use of Endocrine Therapies.”
Recent Results in Cancer Research 152: 227–44.
Humphrey, L. L., M. Helfand, B. K. Chan, and S. H. Woolf. 2002.
“Breast Cancer Screening: A Summary of the Evidence for
the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.” Annals of Internal
Medicine 137 (5 Part 1): 347–60.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2008.
“Screening for Breast Cancer.” In World Cancer Report,
edited by P. Boyle and B. Levin, 296–301. Lyon: IARC.
Ichikawa, L. E., W. E. Barlow, M. L. Anderson, S. H. Taplin,
B. M. Geller, and others. 2010. “Time Trends in Radiologists’
Interpretive Performance at Screening Mammography
from the Community-Based Breast Cancer Surveillance
Consortium, 1996–2004.” Radiology 256 (1): 74–82.
doi:10.1148/radiol.10091881.
Instituto Nacional de Cancerología. 2006. Recomendaciones
para la detección temprana de cáncer de mama en Colombia.
Guía de práctica clínica No.1. Bogotá: Instituto Nacional de
Cancerología.
Jemal, A., R. Siegel, E. Ward, Y. Hao, J. Xu, and others. 2009.
“Cancer Statistics, 2009.” CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians
59 (4): 225–49. doi:caac.20006 [pii];10.3322/caac.20006.
Jemal, A., A. Thomas, T. Murray, and M. Thun. 2002. “Cancer
Statistics, 2002.” CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 52 (1):
23–47.
Johannesson, M., and M. C. Weinstein. 1993. “On the Decision
Rules of Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.” Journal of Health
Economics 12 (4): 459–67.
Kalager, M., M. Zelen, F. Langmark, and H. O. Adami. 2010.
“Effect of Screening Mammography on Breast-Cancer
Mortality in Norway.” The New England Journal of Medicine
363 (13): 1203–10. doi:10.1056/NEJMoa1000727.
Kanemura, S., I. Tsuji, N. Ohuchi, H. Takei, T. Yokoe, and
others. 1999. “A Case Control Study on the Effectiveness of
Breast Cancer Screening by Clinical Breast Examination in
Japan.” Japanese Journal of Cancer Research 90 (6): 607–13.
Kardinah, D., B. O. Anderson, C. Duggan, I. A. Ali, and
D. B. Thomas. 2014. “Short Report: Limited Effectiveness
of Screening Mammography in Addition to Clinical Breast
Examination by Trained Nurse Midwives in Rural Jakarta,
Indonesia.” International Journal of Cancer 134 (5): 1250–55.
doi:10.1002/ijc.28442.

66

Cancer

Kuroishi, T., K. Hirose, T. Suzuki, and S. Tominaga. 2000.
“Effectiveness of Mass Screening for Breast Cancer in
Japan.” Breast Cancer 7 (1): 1–8.
Lee, S. G., Y. G. Jee, H. C. Chung, S. B. Kim, J. Ro, and others.
2009. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Adjuvant Therapy
for Node Positive Breast Cancer in Korea: Docetaxel,
Doxorubicin and Cyclophosphamide (TAC) Versus
Fluorouracil, Doxorubicin and Cyclophosphamide (FAC).”
Breast Cancer Research and Treatment 114 (3): 589–95.
doi:10.1007/s10549-008-0035-0.
Lee, S. Y., S. H. Jeong, Y. N. Kim, J. Kim, D. R. Kang,
and others. 2009. “Cost-Effective Mammography
Screening in Korea: High Incidence of Breast Cancer
in Young Women.” Cancer Science 100 (6): 1105–11.
doi:10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01147.x.
Liubao, P., W. Xiaomin, T. Chongqing, J. Kamon, C. Gannong,
and others. 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Adjuvant
Therapy for Operable Breast Cancer from a Chinese
Perspective: Doxorubicin Plus Cyclophosphamide versus
Docetaxel Plus Cyclophosphamide.” Pharmacoeconomics
27 (10): 873–86.
Love, R. R., N. B. Duc, D. C. Allred, N. C. Binh, N. V. Dinh,
and others. 2002. “Oophorectomy and Tamoxifen Adjuvant
Therapy in Premenopausal Vietnamese and Chinese
Women with Operable Breast Cancer.” Journal of Clinical
Oncology 20 (10): 2559–66.
Masood, S., L. Vass, J. A. Ibarra, Jr., B. M. Ljung, H. Stalsberg, and
others. 2008. “Breast Pathology Guideline Implementation
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Cancer 113 (Suppl.
8): 2297–304. doi:10.1002/cncr.23833.
McCannon, C. J., D. M. Berwick, and M. R. Massoud. 2007.
“The Science of Large-Scale Change in Global Health.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 298 (16):
1937–39.
McTiernan, A., P. Porter, and J. D. Potter. 2008. “Breast Cancer
Prevention in Countries with Diverse Resources.” Cancer
113 (Suppl. 8): 2325–30. doi:10.1002/cncr.23829.
Mittra, I., G. A. Mishra, S. Singh, S. Aranke, P. Notani, and
others. 2010. “A Cluster Randomized, Controlled Trial of
Breast and Cervix Cancer Screening in Mumbai, India:
Methodology and Interim Results after Three Rounds of
Screening.” International Journal of Cancer 126 (4): 976–84.
doi:10.1002/ijc.24840.
Morrow, M., E. A. Strom, L. W. Bassett, D. D. Dershaw, B. Fowble,
and others. 2002. “Standard for Breast Conservation
Therapy in the Management of Invasive Breast Carcinoma.”
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 52 (5): 277–300.
Murillo, R., S. Díaz, O. Sánchez, F. Perry, M. Piñeros, and
others. 2008. “Pilot Implementation of Breast Cancer Early
Detection Programs in Colombia.” Breast Care 3: 29–32.
Murray, C. J. L., and A. D. Lopez. 1996. “The Global Burden
of Disease: A Comprehensive Assessment of Mortality and
Disability from Diseases, Injuries, and Risk Factors in 1990
and Projected to 2020.” In Global Burden of Disease and
Injury. Cambridge, MA: Harvard School of Public Health.
Nelson, H. D., K. Tyne, A. Naik, C. Bougatsos, B. K. Chan,
and others. 2009. “Screening for Breast Cancer: An
Update for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force.”

Annals of Internal Medicine 151 (10): 727–37, W237–42.
doi:10.7326/0003-4819-151-10-200911170-00009.
Nguyen, L. H., W. Laohasiriwong, J. F. Stewart, P. Wright,
Y. T. B. Nguyen, and others. 2013. “Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis of a Screening Program for Breast Cancer in
Vietnam.” Value in Health Regional Issues 2(1): 21–28.
Okonkwo, Q. L., G. Draisma, A. der Kinderen, M. L. Brown,
and H. J. de Koning. 2008. “Breast Cancer Screening Policies
in Developing Countries: A Cost-Effectiveness Analysis for
India.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 100 (18):
1290–300. doi:10.1093/jnci/djn292.
Parkin, D. M., and L. M. Fernandez. 2006. “Use of Statistics
to Assess the Global Burden of Breast Cancer.” The Breast
Journal 12 (Suppl. 1): S70–80.
Perloff, M., G. J. Lesnick, A. Korzun, F. Chu, J. F. Holland,
and others. 1988. “Combination Chemotherapy with
Mastectomy or Radiotherapy for Stage III Breast Carcinoma:
A Cancer and Leukemia Group B Study.” Journal of Clinical
Oncology 6 (2): 261–69.
Pinto, A. C., F. Ades, E. de Azambuja, and M. Piccart-Gebhart.
2013. “Trastuzumab for Patients with HER2 Positive
Breast Cancer: Delivery, Duration and Combination
Therapies.” Breast 22 (Suppl. 2): S152–55. doi:10.1016/j
.breast.2013.07.029.
Pisani, P., D. M. Parkin, C. Ngelangel, D. Esteban, L. Gibson,
and others. 2006. “Outcome of Screening by Clinical
Examination of the Breast in a Trial in the Philippines.”
International Journal of Cancer 118 (1): 149–54.
Poon, D., B. O. Anderson, L. T. Chen, K. Tanaka,
W. Y. Lau, and others. 2009. “Management of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma in Asia: Consensus Statement from the Asian
Oncology Summit 2009.” The Lancet Oncology 10 (11):
1111–18. doi:S1470-2045(09)70241-4 [pii]; 10.1016
/S1470-2045(09)70241-4.
Porter, P. 2008. “‘Westernizing’ Women’s Risks? Breast Cancer
in Lower-Income Countries.” The New England Journal of
Medicine 358 (3): 213–16.
Salomon, J. A., N. Carvalho, C. Gutierrez-Delgado, R. Orozco,
A. Mancuso, and others. 2012. “Intervention Strategies
to Reduce the Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases
in Mexico: Cost Effectiveness Analysis.” British Medical
Journal 344: e355. doi:10.1136/bmj.e355.
Sant, M., C. Allemani, F. Berrino, M. P. Coleman, T. Aareleid,
and others. 2004. “Breast Carcinoma Survival in Europe
and the United States.” Cancer 100 (4): 715–22.
Schmidt, C. 2009. “Komen/ASCO Program Aims to Swell
Ranks of Minority Oncologists.” Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 101 (4): 224–25, 227.
Semiglazov, V. F., V. M. Moiseyenko, A. G. Manikhas,
S. A. Protsenko, R. S. Kharikova, and others. 1999. “Role
of Breast Self-Examination in Early Detection of Breast
Cancer: Russia/WHO Prospective Randomized Trial in St.
Petersburg.” Cancer Strategy 1: 145–51.
Shyyan, R., S. F. Sener, B. O. Anderson, L. M. Garrote,
G. N. Hortobagyi, and others. 2008. “Guideline
Implementation for Breast Healthcare in Low- and MiddleIncome Countries: Diagnosis Resource Allocation.” Cancer
113 (Suppl. 8): 2257–68. doi:10.1002/cncr.23840.

Smith, R. A. 2000. “Breast Cancer Screening among Women
Younger Than Age 50: A Current Assessment of the Issues.”
CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 50 (5): 312–36.
Soo, R. A., B. O. Anderson, B. C. Cho, C. H. Yang, M. Liao, and
others. 2009. “First-Line Systemic Treatment of Advanced
Stage Non-Small-Cell Lung Cancer in Asia: Consensus
Statement from the Asian Oncology Summit 2009.”
The Lancet Oncology 10 (11): 1102–10. doi:10.1016
/S1470-2045(09)70238-4.
Tan-Torres Edejer, T., R. Baltussen, T. Adam, R. Hutubessy,
A. Acharya, and others. 2003. Making Choices in Health:
WHO Guide to Cost-Effectiveness Analysis. Geneva: WHO.
Tangjitgamol, S., B. O. Anderson, H. T. See, C. Lertbutsayanukul,
N. Sirisabya, and others. 2009. “Management of Endometrial
Cancer in Asia: Consensus Statement from the Asian
Oncology Summit 2009.” The Lancet Oncology 10 (11):
1119–27. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70290-6.
Theriault, R. L., R. W. Carlson, C. Allred, B. O. Anderson,
H. J. Burstein, and others. 2013. “Breast Cancer, Version
3.2013: Featured Updates to the NCCN Guidelines.” Journal
of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network 11 (7):
753–60; quiz 761.
Thomas, D. B., D. L. Gao, R. M. Ray, W. W. Wang, C. J. Allison,
and others. 2002. “Randomized Trial of Breast SelfExamination in Shanghai: Final Results.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 94 (19): 1445–57.
Thomas, D. B., R. H. Murillo, Kardinah, and B. O. Anderson.
2013. “Breast Cancer Early Detection and Clinical
Guidelines.” In Cancer Epidemiology: Low and Middle
Income Countries and Special Populations, edited by
A. S. Soliman, D. Schottenfeld, and P. Boffetta, 378–95. New
York: Oxford University Press.
Thorat, M. A., A. Rangole, M. S. Nadkarni, V. Parmar, and
R. A. Badwe. 2008. “Revision Surgery for Breast Cancer:
Single-Institution Experience.” Cancer 113 (Suppl. 8):
2347–52. doi:10.1002/cncr.23839.
Thornton, H. 2014. “Bringing an End to Mandatory Breast
Cancer Screening in Uruguay.” British Medical Journal 348:
g390. doi:10.1136/bmj.g390.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force. 2009. “Screening for
Breast Cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement.” Annals of Internal
Medicine 151 (10): 716–26, W-236. doi:151/10/716 [pii];
10.1059/0003-4819-151-10-200911170-00008.
Visco, F. 2007. “The National Breast Cancer Coalition: Setting
the Standard for Advocate Collaboration in Clinical Trials.”
Cancer Treatment and Research 132: 143–56.
Wee, J. T., B. O. Anderson, J. Corry, A. D’Cruz, K. C. Soo,
and others. 2009. “Management of the Neck after
Chemoradiotherapy for Head and Neck Cancers in Asia:
Consensus Statement from the Asian Oncology Summit
2009.” The Lancet Oncology 10 (11): 1086–92. doi:S1470
-2045(09)70266-9 [pii]; 10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70266-9.
Weir, H. K., M. J. Thun, B. F. Hankey, L. A. Ries, H. L. Howe, and
others. 2003. “Annual Report to the Nation on the Status of
Cancer, 1975–2000, Featuring the Uses of Surveillance Data
for Cancer Prevention and Control.” Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 95 (17): 1276–99.

Breast Cancer

67

Winn, R. J., and W. Z. Botnick. 1997. “The NCCN Guideline
Program: A Conceptual Framework.” Oncology (Williston
Park) 11 (11A): 25–32.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. Macroeconomics
and Health: Investing in Health for Economic Development.
Geneva: WHO.
———. 2002. “Executive Summary.” In National Cancer
Control Programmes: Policies and Managerial Guidelines,
1–24. Geneva: WHO.
Wong, N. S., B. O. Anderson, K. S. Khoo, P. T. Ang, C. H. Yip,
and others. 2009. “Management of HER2-Positive Breast
Cancer in Asia: Consensus Statement from the Asian
Oncology Summit 2009.” The Lancet Oncology 10 (11):
1077–85. doi:10.1016/S1470-2045(09)70230-X.
Wong, I. O., B. J. Cowling, C. M. Schooling, and G. M. Leung.
2007. “Age-Period-Cohort Projections of Breast Cancer
Incidence in a Rapidly Transitioning Chinese Population.”
International Journal of Cancer 121 (7): 1556–63.
Wong, I. O., K. M. Kuntz, B. J. Cowling, C. L. Lam, and
G. M. Leung. 2007. “Cost Effectiveness of Mammography
Screening for Chinese Women.” Cancer 110 (4): 885–95.
doi:10.1002/cncr.22848.
Yang, J. J., S. K. Park, L. Y. Cho, W. Han, B. Park, and
others. 2010. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of 5 Years of

68

Cancer

Postoperative Adjuvant Tamoxifen Therapy for Korean
Women with Breast Cancer: Retrospective Cohort
Study of the Korean Breast Cancer Society Database.”
Clinical Therapeutics 32 (6): 1122–38. doi:10.1016/j
.clinthera.2010.05.013.
Yip, C. H., R. A. Smith, B. O. Anderson, A. B. Miller, D. B. Thomas,
and others. 2008. “Guideline Implementation for Breast
Healthcare in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: Early
Detection Resource Allocation.” Cancer 113 (Suppl. 8):
2244–56. doi:10.1002/cncr.23842.
Yoo, C., J. H. Ahn, K. H. Jung, S. B. Kim, H. H. Kim, and others.
2012. “Impact of Immunohistochemistry-Based Molecular
Subtype on Chemosensitivity and Survival in Patients with
Breast Cancer Following Neoadjuvant Chemotherapy.”
Journal of Breast Cancer 15 (2): 203–10. doi:10.4048
/jbc.2012.15.2.203.
Zelle, S. G., and R. M. Baltussen. 2013. “Economic Analyses
of Breast Cancer Control in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries: A Systematic Review.” Systematic Reviews 2: 20.
doi:10.1186/2046-4053-2-20.
Zelle, S. G., K. M. Nyarko, W. K. Bosu, M. Aikins, L. M. Niens, and
others. 2012. “Costs, Effects and Cost-Effectiveness of Breast
Cancer Control in Ghana.” Tropical Medicine & International
Health 17 (8): 1031–43.doi:10.1111/j.1365-3156.2012.03021.x.

Chapter

4

Cervical Cancer
Lynette Denny, Rolando Herrero, Carol Levin, and Jane J. Kim

INTRODUCTION

BURDEN OF CERVICAL CANCER1

Cervical cancer, a largely preventable disease, is one of
the most common cancers found in women living in
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). A striking
reduction in the incidence of and mortality from cervical cancer occurred in the past century in those countries
that were able to establish successful national screening
programs. These programs relied on cytology-based
Papanicolaou smears to identify cervical cancer precursors that can be removed before progressing to invasive
cancer. Prevention of up to 91 percent of all invasive
cervical cancers has been achieved in countries able to
implement widespread cytology-based screening.
However, these programs are expensive and require
robust and well-funded health care systems. Few LMICs
have initiated or sustained cytology-based cervical cancer prevention programs, and these countries experience
very high incidence and mortality rates. The unequal
burden of cervical cancer is an example of the impact
of unequal access to health care. Fortunately, alternative
strategies to prevent cervical cancer have been investigated and extensively evaluated in these settings. The
recent introduction of two commercially available vaccines against human papillomavirus (HPV) has offered
the possibility of primary prevention of cervical cancer.
This chapter focuses on these innovations.

Global Burden of Disease
Cervical cancer, caused by HPV, is the third leading
malignancy among women in the world, after breast
cancer and colorectal cancer, with an estimated 527,624
new cases and 265,653 deaths in 2012 (Ferlay and others
2013). Incidence and mortality rates have been declining
in most areas of the world in the past 30 years, at a worldwide rate of about 1.6 percent per year (Forouzanfar
and others 2011). This decline is a result of increased
access to health services, reductions in some risk factors
(such as fertility rates), improvements in treatment, and
successful cytology-based screening programs. However,
more than 80 percent of cases and 88 percent of deaths
occur in LMICs. Cervical cancer is still the leading
cancer in women in many LMICs; some areas report
recent increases in rates, including several economies in
Europe and Central Asia (Arbyn and others 2011).
A striking characteristic of cervical cancer is its variation by country, with a generally strong inverse correlation between the level of development and the incidence
and mortality. Survival once the disease has developed
is also much better in richer than in poorer countries.
Figure 4.1 shows trends of incidence and mortality in
selected countries.

Corresponding author: Lynette Denny, MBChB (UCT), MMED (O&G), PhD, FCOG (SA), lynette.denny@uct.ac.za

69

Figure 4.1 Trends of Age-Standardized Rates of Cervical Cancer Incidence and Mortality in Selected Countries
b. High- and upper-middle-income countries

50

50

40

40

30

30

20

20

Age-standardized (world) rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized (world) rate per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and lower-middle-income countries

15

10

7
5

3

15

10

7
5

3

2

2

1.5

1.5

1

1

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Incidence
Uganda

India

Thailand

Philippines

1990

2000

2010

Calendar year

Calendar year

Philippines

Mortality
Brazil

United States:
Black

United States:
White

China

Spain

Brazil

China

United States:
White

United States:
Black

Spain
Source: CI5plus (http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx) and WHO Mortality Database (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/mortality_rawdata/en/index.html).
Note: Data for the economies in the graphs are for Uganda (Kampala), Thailand (Chiang Mai), Philippines (Manila), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Brazil (Goiâna), Spain (Granada, Murcia, Navarra,
and Tarragona), China (Hong Kong SAR, China, and Shanghai), and the United States (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program). All available data for these economies are shown.

70

Cancer

Regional Burden of Disease
Despite the declining global rates, the number of new
cases and deaths has increased constantly by about
0.5 percent per year because of population aging.
With no new intervention, the increase will continue,
particularly in LMICs where the life expectancy of
women is improving. For example, in Latin America
and the Caribbean, the estimated number of new
cases is likely to increase by 75 percent between 2002
and 2025 if the incidence rates remain at 2002 levels,
because of population growth and aging alone (Parkin
and others 2008).
The disease is strongly influenced by cultural and
religious practices that govern sexual behavior and
transmission of HPV. Sub-Saharan Africa has the highest estimated rates of cervical cancer; in Guinea, Malawi,
and Zambia, the age-standardized incidence rate is over
50 per 100,000 (Arbyn and others 2011). In contrast, in
countries in the Middle East and North Africa, such as
Algeria, the Arab Republic of Egypt, Libya, Sudan, and
Tunisia, where sexual behaviors are more conservative,
the recorded incidence rates are below 10 per 100,000
women. In high-income countries (HICs), rates are even
lower, at about 5 per 100,000 women.
In Latin America and the Caribbean, Guyana,
Honduras, Jamaica, and Nicaragua have rates around 40
per 100,000. In Asia, the highest rates are in Bangladesh,
Cambodia, India, and Nepal.
Map 4.1 shows the incidence of cervical cancer by
country in 2012; figure 4.2 shows the contrast between

the rates of incidence and mortality between national
income groupings.
Even within HICs, the highest incidence and
mortality rates are among the poorest or most marginalized women. For example, in the United States,
where the average rates are low and cervical cancer
has consistently declined in recent decades, strong
disparities still exist by race and socioeconomic status
(Singh 2012), reflecting the variability in accessibility
of services. The other notable characteristic of cervical cancer is that it affects relatively young women
who often have many children and are frequently
sole providers. The median age at death for women
with cervical cancer is 54 years; the burden of disease
among women under age 40 years is high compared
with other cancers, because of the large numbers of
women in these age groups in LMICs and the fact that
cervical cancer rates begin to rise at younger ages than
other cancers.
Because cervical cancer affects relatively young
women, it ranks highest among cancers according
to a disability-adjusted life years (DALYs) metric.
In a recent study, DALYs caused by cervical cancer
ranged from 84 per 100,000 women in areas with a
very high Human Development Index (HDI)2 to 595
per 100,000 in areas with a low HDI (Soerjomataram
and others 2012). Breast cancer DALYs ranged from a
high of 566 age-adjusted DALYs per 100,000 in populations with a very high HDI to 387 in those with a
low HDI.

Map 4.1 Age-Standardized Cervical Cancer Incidence Rates, 2012
IBRD 41381 | FEBRUARY 2015

Cervcan Cancer in Women,
0–69 years
ASR (World) Indcidence
Greater than 20
18.3–20
12.8–18.3
7.4–12.8
Less than 7.4
No data

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: ASR = age-standardized rate.

Cervical Cancer

71

Figure 4.2 Age-Standardized Cervical Cancer Incidence and Mortality Rates per 100,000
Women, by World Bank Income Group

Low-income
Lower-middle-income
(except India)
Upper-middle-income
(except China)
High-income
China
India

0

10
20
Age-standardized rate (world) per 100,000, 0–69 years
Incidence

30

Mortality

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.

NATURAL HISTORY OF CERVICAL CANCER
The natural history has been studied extensively,
and persistent infection of the cervix with certain
high-risk types of HPV has been well established as
a necessary cause of cervical cancer (Walboomers
and others 1999). HPV is a very common sexually
transmitted infection, usually acquired soon after initiation of sexual activity. Most HPV infections clear
spontaneously within one to two years; those that
persist, particularly high-risk types of HPV (including HPV 16 and 18), may progress to cervical cancer
precursors, and ultimately to invasive cervical cancer.
High-risk types of HPV are identified in nearly all
cancers of the cervix, and the relative risk of cervical
cancer associated with persistent, ongoing infection
with high-risk types of HPV is higher than the risk of
lung cancer associated with smoking. HPV 16 and 18
are responsible for about 70 percent of cases worldwide (http://www.iarc.fr). There is little geographic
variation in the predominant HPV types associated
with cervical cancer.
A study that evaluated HPV infection in 10,575
histologically confirmed cases of invasive cancer from
38 countries in Asia, Europe, Latin America and the
Caribbean, North America, Oceania, and Sub-Saharan
Africa over a 60-year period found that 85 percent

72

Cancer

(n = 8,977) of the cases were positive for HPV DNA (de
Sanjose and others 2010). HPV types 16, 18, and 45 were
the three most common types in each histologic form
of cervical cancer (squamous cell, adenocarcinoma, and
adenosquamous carcinoma), accounting for 61 percent,
10 percent, and 6 percent, respectively.
Good evidence suggests that HPV infection precedes the development of cervical cancer by decades
and that persistent infection with HPV is necessary
for the development and progression of precancerous
lesions of the cervix, either to higher grades of precancerous disease or to cancer. Cervical cancer progresses
slowly from a preinvasive state to invasive cervical
cancer, a process that can take 10–30 years (Wright
and Kurman 1994).
However, HPV infections are very common, particularly among young women (Herrero and others
2005), where the majority of infections are likely to
regress spontaneously as a result of activation of the
immune system.
Cervical Cytology Classification and Terminology
In 1988, the Bethesda classification of cytology was
adopted and has been revised several times (National
Cancer Workshop 1989). The latest consensus guidelines
for the management of abnormal cytology in the United

States were published in 2013 (Massad and others 2013)
and can be accessed at http://www.asccp.org.

Cervical Cancer and Infection with Human
Immunodeficiency Virus
Women infected with human immunodeficiency virus
(HIV) have an increased risk of being infected with HPV
and are at increased risk for cervical cancer. Studies have
consistently shown higher prevalence of HPV infection,
more persistent infections with HPV, greater infections
with multiple types of HPV, and higher prevalence
of cervical cancer precursors in HIV-infected women
(Ellerbrock and others 2000; Harris and others 2005;
Palefsky and others 1999). The Rwandan Women’s
Interassociation Study and Assessment is an observational prospective cohort study of 710 HIV-positive and
226 HIV-negative Rwandan women enrolled in 2005
(Singh and others 2009). The prevalence of HPV was
significantly higher in the HIV-positive group overall
and in each 10-year age group. Forty-six percent of
HIV-positive women had high-risk types of HPV and
35 percent were infected with multiple types, both of
which were associated with a higher risk of abnormal
cytological findings.
The association with HIV is important because
integrating cervical cancer prevention strategies with
chronic care for HIV-positive women is essential to
maximizing the health-giving benefit of antiretroviral
therapy. In many countries in Sub-Saharan Africa,
antiretroviral therapy is free, but cervical cancer screening and treatment are not.

SECONDARY PREVENTION OF CERVICAL
CANCER THROUGH SCREENING
Historically, cervical cancer screening, also known as
secondary prevention of cervical cancer, was based on
examining cells collected from the surface of the cervix
by Pap smear (cytology), followed by colposcopy for
women with abnormal smears and histological assessment, followed by surgical treatment for histologically
proven cancer precursors. This approach resulted in
dramatic reductions in cervical cancer incidence and
mortality in health systems that were robust enough to
support relatively complex screening programs effectively. However, very few LMICs have been able to
initiate or sustain cytology-based screening programs
because of lack of adequate resources or health care or
laboratory infrastructure.
For screening and treatment of precancerous
lesions, several new tools have been developed that

are better suited to low-resource settings. Depending
mainly on the target age group and frequency of
screening, these tools may be effective in reducing
cervical cancer rates. The new interventions include
the following:
• Screening with visual inspection with acetic acid
(VIA)
• Screening with HPV DNA testing
• Treatment with ablative techniques (cryotherapy and
cold coagulation)
• Treatment using excisional techniques, called loop
electrocautery excision procedure (LEEP), also
known as large loop excision of the transformational
zone (LLETZ), and cone biopsy.
Impact of Cervical Cytology-Based Screening
Programs
Cytology-based cervical cancer screening, which began
in the early 1960s in the Scandinavian countries, was
not evaluated in randomized trials to assess the impact
of screening on cervical cancer incidence or mortality.
The marked reduction in cervical cancer incidence and
mortality after cytology-based screening programs were
initiated in a variety of LMICs was interpreted as strong
nonexperimental support for organized cervical cancer
screening programs.
The International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC) conducted a comprehensive analysis of data
from several of the largest screening programs in the
world in 1986; the analysis showed that well-organized,
cytology-based screening programs were effective
in reducing cervical cancer incidence and mortality
(Hakama 1986). In the Nordic countries, following
the introduction of nationwide screening in the 1960s,
mortality rates from cervical cancer fell between 84 and
11 percent, respectively, corresponding to the country
with the shortest screening interval and widest age
range (Iceland) and to the country with only 5 percent
population coverage by an organized screening program (Norway) (Laara, Day, and Hakama 1987).
Further, the age-specific trends indicated that the target age range of a screening program was a more important determinant of risk reduction than the frequency
of screening within that age range. This finding was
in agreement with the estimates of the IARC Working
Group on Cervical Cancer Screening that for interscreen
intervals of up to five years, the protective effect of
organized screening exceeded 80 percent throughout the
targeted age group (IARC Working Group on Cervical
Cancer Screening 1986a, 1986b). It is clear that the extent
to which screening programs have succeeded or failed

Cervical Cancer

73

to decrease the incidence of and mortality from cervical
cancer is largely a function of three factors:
• The extent of screening coverage of the population
at risk
• The target age of women screened
• The reliability of cytology services in the program.
Gakidou, Nordhagen, and Obermeyer (2008) evaluated screening programs in 57 countries and found that
the levels of effective screening coverage using cytology
vary widely across countries, from over 80 percent
in Austria and Luxembourg to less than 1 percent in
Bangladesh, Ethiopia, and Myanmar. Many women in
low-income countries (LICs) had never had a pelvic
examination. This proportion of women is largest in
Bangladesh, Ethiopia, and Malawi, where more than
90 percent of women report never having had a pelvic
examination, compared with 9 percent of women living in the richest global wealth decile. Although crude
coverage rates are high for women in the richest wealth
deciles, effective coverage rates are overall low, with rates
of around 60 percent and less than 10 percent in the
poorest countries.
Screening efforts have failed to produce the expected
reductions in cervical cancer mortality in many places,
even when large numbers of Pap smears were performed,
because the wrong women have been screened (for
example, younger women attending antenatal clinics),
coverage of the most at-risk population was too low
(that is, women ages 35–64 years), the quality of cervical
smears was poor (Irwin, Oberle, and Rosero-Bixby 1991;
Lazcano-Ponce and others 1994; Sankaranarayanan and
Pisani 1997), and follow-up of screen-positive women was
incomplete. In all cases, funds were spent for little gain.

Alternative Approaches to Cytology for Cervical
Cancer Screening
Visual Inspection with Acetic Acid
VIA involves applying a 3–5 percent acetic acid solution
to the cervix and then examining it with the naked eye
using a bright light source. No expensive equipment or
supplies are needed, and screening takes less than five
minutes. A well-defined aceto-white area close to the
transformation zone indicates a positive test.
VIA is inexpensive and simple and can be carried out
by primary care staff. Most important, VIA provides an
immediate result that can be used to decide on treatment, usually with cryotherapy, which requires training
but no surgery or anesthetic.
It is difficult to recommend VIA unconditionally,
however, because its sensitivity and specificity are lower
than those of other screening methods (table 4.1). VIA
sensitivity and specificity are variable, because they are
highly dependent on the training and skill of the staff
carrying out the examinations. The accuracy of the test
decreases with the increasing age of the women screened.
In cross-sectional studies, the sensitivity and specificity
of VIA compared favorably with cytology in detecting
high-grade cervical cancer precursor lesions and cervical cancer. Sensitivity has varied from 49 to 96 percent,
and specificity has varied from 49 to 98 percent (Denny,
Quinn, and Sankaranarayanan 2006). However, many of
these studies suffer from verification bias, where the true
status of disease in test-negative women is unknown.
Sauvaget and others (2011) performed a meta-analysis
of 26 studies of VIA with confirmatory testing, using
high-grade squamous intraepithelial lesions (HSIL) as
the disease threshold. Sauvaget and others (2011) report a
sensitivity of 80 percent specificity (range 79–82 percent)
and 92 percent specificity (range 91–92 percent) for

Table 4.1 Performance and Characteristics of Screening Methods
Screening test

Sensitivity

Specificity

Characteristics

Conventional cytology

Moderate
(44–78%)

High (91–96%)

Adequate health care infrastructure required; laboratory based; stringent
training and quality control required

HPV DNA testing

High (66–100%)

Moderate
(61–96%)

Laboratory based; high throughput; objective, reproducible, and robust;
currently expensive

• VIA

Moderate
(67–79%)

Low (49–86%)

Low technology; low cost

• VIAM

Moderate
(62–73%)

Low (86–87%)

Linkage to immediate treatment possible; suitable for low-resource settings

Colposcopy

Low (44–77%)

Low (85–90%)

Expensive; inappropriate for low-resource settings

Visual inspection methods

Source: Ranges of sensitivity and specificity adapted from Cuzick and others 2008.
Note: HPV = human papillomavirus; VIA = visual inspection with acetic acid; VIAM = magnified visual inspection with acetic acid.

74

Cancer

VIA, with a positive predictive value of 10 percent.
They conclude that in very low-resource settings where
the infrastructure for laboratory-based testing is not
available, VIA is a reasonable alternative to cytology.
However, in more recent randomized studies, VIA has
performed less well.
Despite its limitations, the possibility of immediate
diagnosis and treatment makes VIA the only possible
alternative in many low-resource settings. One potential use of VIA that would have a significant impact is
following an HPV test, for HPV-positive women only,
to make treatment decisions. The utility of VIA in this
context is promising but yet to be proven.
Case Study of Upscaling VIA
From 2005 through 2009, the World Health Organization
(WHO) sponsored a VIA demonstration project in six
Sub-Saharan African countries: Madagascar, Malawi,
Nigeria, Tanzania, Uganda, and Zambia (WHO 2012).
In all, 19,579 women were screened with VIA. Of these,
1,980 were VIA-positive (11.5 percent); cancer was
suspected in 326 (1.7 percent). Of the VIA-positive women,
1,737 were eligible for cryotherapy (87.7 percent); of these,
1,058 (60.9 percent) were treated, 601 (34.6 percent) were
lost to follow-up, and 78 women were not treated. Of the
women treated, 243 (39.1 percent) were treated during the
same visit as the screening.
No information was available for 230 of the 326
women in whom cancer was suspected (70.5 percent);
of the 96 women investigated, cancer was confirmed
in 79, but no staging information was recorded; 77 of the
women were treated, mostly with radiation.
This is an interesting study of “real world” VIA
screening, with all of the difficulties of any screening
program, even with a test as simple as VIA. These
difficulties range from achieving adequate coverage;
to losing to follow-up the large number of women
needing treatment (only 60 percent of eligible women
were treated); to treating women on the same day as
screening (“screen and treat”), which occurred for less
than 40 percent of the women. The failure to refer over
70 percent of women with suspicious lesions for further
evaluation—possibly because cervical biopsy is not a
free service in any of these countries and most women
could not afford to pay—is disturbing. The greatest
utility of VIA in countries that cannot afford any
alternative is to establish the necessary infrastructure
to provide health care services to older women. Once
VIA becomes successfully implemented, it should be
relatively easy to introduce more sensitive methods of
screening into the system. In many LMICs, establishing
a sustainable and appropriate infrastructure is most
likely the priority.

HPV Testing
Highly sensitive and reproducible laboratory techniques
to detect oncogenic HPV and cervical cancer have been
developed and are being used or considered in place
of cervical cytology for primary screening, in addition
to other potential uses (Cuzick and others 2008). The
cervix is sampled with a brush, which is inserted into
the endocervix and then removed and placed in a tube
containing special transport media. The U.S. Food and
Drug Administration has approved five of the many tests
available for routine laboratory service:
• Hybrid Capture 2 detects 13 oncogenic types of HPV
(16, 18, 31, 33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, and 68).
• Cervista HPV HR detects 14 HPV types (16, 18, 31,
33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68).
• Cervista HPV 16/18 detects only HPV 16 and 18.
• Aptima (transcription–mediated amplification test)
detects RNA from 14 HPV types (16, 18, 31, 33, 35,
39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68).
• Cobas 4800 (real-time polymerase chain reaction
[PCR]–based test) detects 14 HPV types (16, 18, 31,
33, 35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, and 68).
Other tests that use PCR technology are being used in
many clinical studies.
HPV testing is an excellent alternative to cytology for
cervical cancer screening (Arbyn and others 2012). In
meta-analyses of cross-sectional studies, the sensitivity
of the Hybrid Capture 2 (HC2) DNA test, the most
commonly used test, was 90 percent to detect CIN2+ and
95 percent to detect CIN3+, with more heterogeneity in
studies from LMICs. Compared with cytology, the sensitivity of HC2 is 23–46 percent higher on average, and
the specificity is 3–8 percent lower (note we are using
the terminology as reported by the authors, hence the
switch between cervical intraepithelial neoplasia (CIN)
and squamous intraepithelial lesion (SIL) terminology).
Another advantage of HPV testing is the possibility
of linking screening to treatment without colposcopy
or prior histological sampling, particularly once either
simplified or point-of-care HPV tests are developed.
A randomized screening trial to evaluate safety investigated the acceptability and efficacy of screening women
and treating those with positive tests without colposcopy and histological sampling (Denny and others
2010). A total of 6,555 previously unscreened women,
ages 35–65 years, were tested for high-risk types of
HPV using HC2 (Qiagen, Gaithersburg, MD, United
States) and VIA, performed by nurses in primary care
settings. This study found that the HPV screen-andtreat arm was associated with a 3.7-fold reduction in the
cumulative detection of CIN2 or greater by 36 months;

Cervical Cancer

75

VIA was associated with a 1.5-fold reduction. For every
100 women screened, the HPV and screen-and-treat
strategy averted 4.1 cases of CIN2 and greater compared
with VIA-and-treat strategies, which averted 1.8 cases.
A further advantage of HPV testing is that specimens can be obtained by self-collection, with almost
complete preservation of the sensitivity and specificity
of the screening method. Self-collection, which can be
done at home, is accepted by women and could significantly increase participation in screening, particularly
by women who are reluctant to undergo a gynecological
examination or who live in remote areas.
Another landmark study was a cluster randomized
trial of villages and centers where 131,746 women ages
30–59 years were recruited and randomly assigned to
one of four groups: HPV testing; cytologic testing; VIA;
or the standard of care, which involved no organized or
opportunistic screening (Sankaranarayanan and others
2009). The incidence rate of cervical cancer stage 2
or higher and death rates from cervical cancer were
significantly higher in the cytologic, VIA, and control
groups compared with the HPV testing group. Further,
the age-standardized incidence rate (ASIR) of invasive
cancer among women who had negative test results on
cytological or VIA testing was more than four times the
rate among HPV-negative women.
The high negative predictive value of HPV testing
(nearly 100 percent) allows the extension of the screening interval, with consequent savings that can offset
the possibly higher cost of the test compared with
cytology. Screening with HPV testing under age 30 is
not recommended, as HPV infection in this group of
women is common, and most infections are likely to
be transient with a low likelihood of developing into
cancer. Screening younger women will add to the costs
of the program and may result in significant overtreatment that may be associated with reproductive
morbidity, in addition to significant emotional and
social problems.
The HPV test is already in use for primary screening in several countries, although in the United States,
primary HPV testing has been recommended only in
combination with cytology in primary screening or for
triage of cytologic abnormalities. A recent study including more than 300,000 women in the United States
concluded that HPV testing without cytology might be
sufficiently sensitive for primary screening (Katki and
others 2011).
Triage of Positive HPV Tests
Even among women over age 30 years, most HPV
infections regress; only a minority of women develop
persistent infection with high-risk types of HPV that

76

Cancer

progresses to cervical cancer precursors and cervical
cancer. HPV testing identifies women at risk, but not
those HPV-positive women who are most likely to
have or to develop in the near future significant disease
requiring treatment. The challenge is to triage these
women by further testing with visual methods, cytology,
molecular biomarkers, or a combination of techniques.
Among the visual methods, colposcopy with subsequent biopsy and treatment of visible lesions is the
usual procedure in cytology-based programs. However,
this method requires highly specialized training and
relatively costly equipment. More importantly, the colposcopic impression, colposcopically guided biopsy,
and histologic diagnosis are poorly reproducible and
have important limitations to the point of reducing
the potential of highly sensitive screening tests. The
current practice of selecting the most worrisome lesion
for biopsy misses up to one-third of prevalent small
HSIL lesions. The collection of multiple biopsies from
aceto-white lesions can increase the sensitivity of colposcopy (Pretorius and others 2011).
Cytology of HPV-positive women is under strong
consideration as a triage method in screening programs, given the high specificity of cytology and ample
expertise and infrastructure existing in some areas.
This method has the advantage of being highly specific,
but it suffers from limited sensitivity. Sensitivity of
cytology is influenced by many factors and is complex,
but used as a triage test for women already identified
as high risk, cytology may suffice. The reduction in the
number of cytology tests required and the restriction
to HPV-positive women may improve the quality of
cytology by reducing the workload and the number of
negative slides.
Using DNA biomarkers, limiting further follow-up
to women infected with HPV 16 and 18, which are
responsible for about 70 percent of cervical cancer and
precursors, can reduce the number of women referred
to colposcopy while maintaining adequate sensitivity
(Castle and others 2011). Overexpression of certain
oncoproteins is a marker for increased risk of progression to cervical cancer and may be a better predictor
of cancer risk than HPV DNA testing alone, although
this is yet to be confirmed (Dockter and others 2009).
One biomarker under intensive study is p16ink4a, which
is overexpressed in cancerous and precancerous cervical
cells. In a meta-analysis of studies using several detection methods, the proportion of smears overexpressing
p16ink4a increases with the severity of cytological abnormalities (12 percent of normals and 89 percent of HSIL)
and histological abnormalities (2 percent of normals
and 82 percent of CIN3) (Sahasrabuddhe, Luhn, and
Wentzensen 2011). A rapid test for the E6 oncoproteins

of HPV types 16, 18, and 45 is undergoing clinical trials
(Schweizer and others 2010).

coverage will most likely be the most clinically effective
and cost-effective strategy for cervical cancer prevention.

PRIMARY PREVENTION OF CERVICAL
CANCER: HPV VACCINES

Public Health Challenges to Implementing HPV
Vaccination
From the point of view of developing countries, introducing the HPV vaccine poses many challenges. The
most obvious is cost. The current price of both bivalent
and quadrivalent vaccines is high, although the costs
have decreased considerably as a result of initiatives
to enable implementation of HPV vaccination in lowresource settings. However, cost is only one aspect.
Unlike the development of a platform for vaccinating
infants and children against a range of diseases (the
Extended Program for Immunization [EPI]), few LMICs
have established pubescent/adolescent health platforms
or school health systems from which to vaccinate young
girls and possibly boys. The infrastructure will have to
be created; for this to happen, a great deal of political
will must be generated. Studies supporting the efficacy
of HPV vaccines involve adolescents, so they are effective
in that age group; however, no completed studies have
included infants, so it would be premature to consider
adding an HPV vaccine to infant EPI. Several studies
including young children are ongoing.
In addition to the need to create a new infrastructure, both vaccines require a cold chain and thus a
reliable source of electricity, which is absent in many
LMICs, particularly in Sub-Saharan Africa. The need for
three injections and follow-up poses its own challenges,
as does the necessity for intramuscular injection, which
requires skill and medical waste disposal. However,
recent data indicate that the immunogenicity and efficacy of two doses of the vaccine may be comparable to
three doses, a promising development that could simplify the logistics and reduce the cost of HPV vaccination programs. Furthermore, the vaccine is administered
to young girls to prevent a disease that will manifest
itself only after 30 years or more. Developing a national
strategy will require those familiar with vaccination,
including pediatricians and public health officials, to
communicate with those who work in the adult oncology field; these two worlds rarely intersect.
A new pubescent or adolescent health platform
could be used beyond HPV vaccination. Such a
platform would provide an excellent opportunity to
offer a range of services to young people, including
booster vaccinations against hepatitis B and tetanus;
possibly an anti-HIV vaccination in the future; antihelminthic medication; nutritional assessment; and
education about drug, tobacco, and alcohol use and
pregnancy prevention and sexuality.

Vaccines that prevent infection with certain types of
HPV are a major breakthrough in preventing cervical
cancer. Monovalent (against HPV 16), bivalent (against
HPV 16 and 18; Cervarix, GlaxoSmithKline Biologicals,
Rixensart, Belgium), and quadrivalent (against HPV 6,
11, 16, and 18; Gardasil, Merck and Co., Inc., West Point,
Pennsylvania) vaccines have been tested in randomized
placebo-controlled trials and shown to be safe, immunogenic, and highly efficacious at preventing HPV infection for up to eight years after vaccination. The bivalent
and quadrivalent vaccines are delivered by intramuscular injection at zero, one, and six months, with the first
dose between the ages of 9 and 13 years.

Efficacy of HPV Vaccines
Evidence from well-conducted, randomized, placebocontrolled trials demonstrates that these vaccines prevent both persistent cervical infection with the types
included in the vaccines in women not previously
exposed to HPV infection, as well as preinvasive lesions
of the anogenital tract associated with the types present
in the vaccines in males and females. In addition, the
quadrivalent vaccine prevents genital warts caused by
types 6 and 11 (both associated with benign disease) in
males and females (The Future II Study Group 2007;
Harper and others 2006; Koutsky and others 2002; Mao
and others 2006; Roteli-Martins and others 2012; Villa
and others 2005).
Bivalent and quadrivalent vaccines appear to offer
full protection against types 16 and 18, which together
cause an estimated 70 percent or more of cervical cancers worldwide, and a slightly lower fraction of cervical
cancer precursors. Some evidence suggests that the
immune response to vaccination against types 16 and
18 also provides some cross-protection against types 45
and 31, which are important in the etiology of cervical
cancer, thereby increasing the projected protection from
vaccination to 75–80 percent.
However, both vaccines are prophylactic and should
be administered to individuals prior to infection. HPV
is the most common sexually transmitted infection in
the world. Ideally, the vaccine should be administered to
girls and possibly boys prior to the onset of sexual activity, the age of which varies considerably by country and
culture. Vaccination of girls ages 9–12 years with high

Cervical Cancer

77

Case Studies of HPV Vaccine Implementation
Rwanda, a country of 11 million people, introduced
an HPV vaccination program in partnership with
Merck, the manufacturer of the quadrivalent vaccine,
in 2010. Merck guaranteed three years of vaccinations
at no cost and concessional prices for future doses. In
April 2011, 93,888 Rwandan girls in primary grade
5 received their first dose of the HPV vaccine, which
represented 95 percent coverage of all Rwandan girls
in the first round, followed by 94 percent in the second
and 93 percent in the third (Binagwaho and others
2012). The success of this program is attributed to
the school-based vaccination and community involvement in identifying girls absent from or not enrolled
in school.
On World Cancer Day 2013, Gavi, the Vaccine
Alliance, announced that it would provide support
for the rollout of HPV vaccination in eight developing
countries: Ghana, Kenya, the Lao People’s Democratic
Republic, Madagascar, Malawi, Niger, Sierra Leone,
and Tanzania; the price has since been established at
US$4.50 per dose (http://www.gavi.org). Further, Gavi
plans to have one million girls vaccinated by introducing
the HPV vaccine in 20 countries by 2015 and hopes to
reach 30 million by 2020 by introducing the vaccine in
40 countries.
Ladner and others (2012) report on the Gardasil Access
Program, managed by Axios Healthcare Development,
which received a large donation of the quadrivalent
vaccine from Merck. Participating projects received free
vaccine and were responsible for the costs related to
the importation, transportation, storage, and distribution of the vaccine, as well as the costs of community
outreach, program management, and data collection.
Eight programs were implemented in seven countries:
Bhutan, Bolivia, Cambodia, Cameroon, Haiti, Lesotho,
and Nepal. The eight programs targeted 87,380 girls,
of whom 76,983 (88 percent) received three doses of
the vaccine. Three vaccine delivery models were used:
health facility–based, school-based, and mixed (health
facility– and school-based). The mixed model resulted in
the best coverage (96.6 percent); the school-based model
was intermediate (88.6 percent); and the health facility
model was the least effective (79.9 percent). The estimated coverage was 94.9 percent for the five programs
that targeted girls ages 9–13 years, and 80.0 percent for
the three programs that vaccinated girls outside that age
range.
These data, which show high coverage in lowresource settings, are encouraging. They suggest that
with sufficient political will, the implementation of HPV
vaccination in low-resource settings should be possible
in the near future.

78

Cancer

Whether countries introduce the vaccine into the
public health sector will be determined by several factors:
• Burden of HPV-associated disease in the country
• Ability to convince politicians and health officials,
particularly those who work with children and vaccination, that it is worthwhile to invest in vaccinating
children to prevent a disease of adulthood
• Creation of the appropriate infrastructure for the
administration of the vaccine
• Cost

TREATMENT OF CERVICAL CANCER
As a result of screening, particularly at long intervals,
some more advanced cancers will be detected, and
some women will come for treatment because of symptoms, commonly abnormal vaginal bleeding (postcoital,
irregular, or postmenopausal), offensive vaginal discharge, pelvic pain, dysuria, or symptoms of local or
advanced metastatic disease.
As for all cancers, treatment of cervical cancer is
determined by the stage of the disease at presentation.
Cervical cancer is staged clinically, for example, through
a pelvirectal examination combined with some basic
tests as part of the metastatic work-up. Most institutions
rely on the International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics (FIGO) 2009 staging.
Treatment options for most stage 1 cancers favor
surgery alone and usually are curative. For women with
later stage 1, stage 2, and early stage 3 cancers, primary
treatment is chemotherapy and radiotherapy, with curative intent but lower success rates than for earlier stages.
For stage 4 disease, treatment is usually palliative and
may involve chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and surgery,
although few women in LMICs are likely to have access
to these services.

COST-EFFECTIVENESS ANALYSIS
Model-Based Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
In addition to the strong evidence of the clinical
effectiveness of primary and secondary prevention of
cervical cancer worldwide, a critical factor in decision
making, particularly in resource-poor settings, is the
financial impact and cost-effectiveness of alternative
strategies. Most economic evaluations of cervical
cancer prevention approaches have utilized mathematical models to project the long-term public health
and economic impacts of prevention strategies in
different populations. State-of-the-art methods, as well
as the limitations of modeling, have been discussed
extensively in published review papers (Brisson, Van

de Velde, and Boily 2009; Canfell and others 2012; Kim,
Brisson, and others 2008).

HPV Vaccination
The economic evaluations of HPV vaccination have
focused primarily on vaccination of preadolescent girls
prior to sexual initiation; only a handful of evaluations
have addressed HPV vaccination of other targeted
groups, such as preadolescent boys or older women
(Tsu and Murray 2011; Tsu, Murray, and Franceschi
2012). Several regional reports published as part of an
HPV monograph series have projected health benefits
(for example, cancer risk reduction and life expectancy,
adjusted or unadjusted for disability or quality of life)
and economic outcomes of HPV vaccination of preadolescent girls in all countries in the following regions:
• East Asia and Pacific (25 countries) (Goldie, Diaz,
Kim, and others 2008)
• Europe and Central Asia (28 countries) (Berkhof and
others 2013)
• Latin America and the Caribbean (33 countries)
(Goldie, Diaz, Constenla, and others 2008)
• Middle East and North Africa (20 countries) (Kim,
Campos, and others 2013)
• Sub-Saharan Africa (48 countries) (Kim, Sharma,
and others 2013)
A related analysis evaluated HPV vaccination in
72 countries eligible for support from Gavi (Goldie,
O’Shea, and others 2008). A handful of country-specific
analyses in these regions and economies have also been
conducted, including Brazil (Goldie and others 2007;
Vanni and others 2012); China (Canfell and others
2011); India (Diaz and others 2008); Malaysia (Aljunid
and others 2010; Ezat and Aljunid 2010); Mexico
(Reynales-Shigematsu, Rodrigues, and Lazcano-Ponce
2009); Taiwan, China (Demarteau and others 2012); and
Thailand (Sharma and others 2011).
The overwhelming majority of these studies has
concluded that HPV vaccination of preadolescent girls
has the potential to reduce substantially the morbidity
and mortality associated with cervical cancer, under
assumptions of sustained, high vaccine efficacy and
reasonable uptake. For example, when assuming vaccination coverage of 70 percent and complete, lifelong
protection against HPV 16/18 cervical cancer, HPV
vaccination was estimated to avert more than 670,000
cervical cancer cases in Sub-Saharan Africa alone over
the lifetimes of women in five consecutive birth cohorts
vaccinated as young adolescents (Kim, Sharma, and
others 2013).

Measures of Cost-Effectiveness
Not surprisingly, HPV vaccination was cost-effective
in more countries as the cost of the vaccine decreased.
Consistently across the regional and country-specific
studies cited, the results have suggested that for a cost per
vaccinated girl (CVG) of US$50 or less, HPV vaccination
of preadolescent girls was good value for money in most
of the countries evaluated. In countries with a relatively
lower disease burden and/or lower per capita gross
domestic product, the vaccine cost threshold at which
HPV vaccination was cost-effective was lower, at US$10
or US$25 CVG. One study, published by the manufacturers of the quadrivalent HPV vaccine, included strategies of vaccinating males and females up to age 24 years
in Mexico; the study found that the most cost-effective
strategy was vaccinating 12-year-old girls alone (Insinga
and others 2007).
Generally, the factors with the greatest influence
on the cost-effectiveness results were the vaccine cost
and discount rate, which reflect the time preference for
health benefits and costs and are important to capture,
given the long time horizon between vaccine expenditure and expected cancer benefits. Vaccine efficacy and
the length of vaccine protection—and the requirement
for booster doses—also influence the results, with the
cost-effectiveness profile diminishing greatly, assuming
protection lasts only 10–20 years and/or requires at least
one booster dose. Variations in cancer incidence moderately influenced the cost-effectiveness ratios.
In interpreting cost-effectiveness results, a critical
distinction must be made between value for resources
and affordability. Affordability will be a critical determinant for success in preventing cervical cancer in
LMICs with high cervical cancer incidence (Natunen
and others 2013). Despite the high value that HPV
vaccination can provide at US$25–US$50 per vaccinated girl, the immediate financial expenditures
required for adoption of HPV vaccination at this cost
may not be attainable in many countries. For example,
the financial requirements for vaccinating five birth
cohorts over five years at 70 percent coverage in all of
Sub-Saharan Africa will range from US$110.0 million
(US$0.55 per dose) to US$2.8 billion (US$19.50 per
dose) (Kim, Sharma, and others 2013). At least one
HPV vaccine manufacturer has offered a price as low
as US$5 per dose to Gavi, undoubtedly diminishing
the financial barrier to accessing HPV vaccines. Study
results suggest that the upfront financial investments in
HPV vaccination may be offset by downstream savings
in costs of cancer care averted at such a low vaccine
price. Careful planning to ensure the sustainability of
an HPV vaccination program will be as important as
the decision to implement it.

Cervical Cancer

79

Recent publications on the incremental program costs
of introducing and scaling up HPV vaccination suggest
that integrating HPV vaccination into existing immunization services is feasible but will likely incur an additional
financial burden to countries above the cost of the vaccine
(Hutubessy and others 2012; Levin and others 2013).
The support by Gavi not only to fund HPV vaccines
directly, but also to develop country HPV vaccination
programs through demonstration projects, will be instrumental in creating sustainable programs; to date, at least
14 countries have applied for demonstration projects.
Future Directions for Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis of HPV Vaccines
Head-to-head comparisons of the bivalent and quadrivalent vaccines are lacking for LICs, but such comparisons
may be more relevant in the future. Economic evaluations
in HICs that have introduced the HPV vaccine have been
conducted comparing the bivalent and quadrivalent vaccines. To date, the results have been conflicting; three studies find that the quadrivalent vaccine is more cost-effective
than the bivalent vaccine (Dee and Howell 2010; Jit and
others 2011; Lee and others 2011). In contrast, two studies
(Demarteau and others 2012; Ezat and Aljunid 2010) find
that the cost-savings from reducing more cases of cervical
cancer (bivalent vaccine) outweigh the cost-savings from
reducing cases of genital warts (quadrivalent vaccine).
Current studies have not yet explored the potential added
benefits from broad-coverage HPV vaccines that target
additional oncogenic HPV types and are anticipated to be
available in the near future; these second-generation vaccines are expected to yield even greater cancer reductions
and are likely further to impact optimal screening, but the
efficacy and costs are unknown.
Cervical Cancer Screening
Studies evaluating screening strategies alone have primarily assessed screening tests (for example, cytology,
HPV DNA tests, and VIA), frequencies (for example, one to three times per lifetime, at 3- to 10-year
intervals), and ages at screening (for example, 30–50
years). In a seminal study, Goldie and others (2005)
assess the cost-effectiveness of screening strategies in
five LMICs with heterogeneous epidemiologic, demographic, and economic profiles. They find that strategies
that required the fewest visits—and thereby minimized
loss to follow-up—were consistently the most costeffective. The reduction in lifetime cervical cancer risk
was 25–36 percent, with only one screening per lifetime;
47–52 percent, with two screenings per lifetime; and
57–60 percent, with three screenings per lifetime. Taking
into consideration the direct medical and patient costs

80

Cancer

associated with screening, the authors conclude that
HPV DNA testing and VIA, requiring one or two clinic
visits, two to three times per lifetime, at age 35 years,
are attractive alternatives to traditional three-visit,
cytology-based testing programs. In a more recent study,
Levin and others (2010) find that increased coverage
levels of cervical cancer screening using rapid HPV tests
were cost-effective for a two-visit strategy for screening
and treatment of precancerous lesions in China.
The most influential factors in determining the relative value of different screening strategies include the
assumptions regarding loss to follow-up between clinic
visits, the clinical performance of the screening test (that
is, the sensitivity/specificity), and the relative costs of
the test. Patient time spent receiving interventions and
traveling to clinics are also found to be influential, given
the long distances to the clinics, lack of paved roads, and
limited public transportation in some settings. Treatment
of precancerous lesions can range from inexpensive
cryotherapy to more complex and costly LEEP, cold
knife conization, and simple hysterectomies. However,
these costs are rarely the main drivers affecting the costeffectiveness of cervical cancer screening strategies.
Remaining challenges include improving the acceptability and accessibility of these services among previously
unscreened women. Even with the strong momentum
toward introducing HPV vaccination programs, investing in expanded quality screening and treatment services
and increasing demand for these services among older
women remain critical, given that screening rates are very
low in Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and SubSaharan Africa, irrespective of income, and that these
women are not the target group for HPV vaccination.
Combined Vaccination and Screening
Increasingly, analyses are considering the potential synergies between preadolescent HPV vaccination followed
by screening in adulthood. The majority of recent
studies are set in upper-middle-income countries, such
as Malaysia (Aljunid and others 2010; Ezat and Aljunid
2010), Mexico (Insinga and others 2007; ReynalesShigematsu, Rodrigues, and Lazcano-Ponce 2009), Peru
(Goldie and others 2012), South Africa (Sinanovic and
others 2009), and Thailand (Praditsitthikorn and others
2011; Sharma and others 2011; Termrungruanglert and
others 2012). Only a handful of such studies are in LICs
and lower-middle-income countries, such as countries
in Eastern Africa (Campos and others 2012), India
(Diaz and others 2008), and Vietnam (Kim, Kobus, and
others 2008).
The findings suggest an opportunity to improve on
cervical cancer prevention by following preadolescent

HPV vaccination with screening (HPV DNA testing)
of women one to three times per lifetime, starting at
about age 40 years. For example, in Thailand, preadolescent HPV vaccination combined with screening
in older women reduced the risk of cervical cancer by
over 50 percent (Sharma and others 2011). In Mexico,
HPV vaccination combined with cytology screening
every three years reduced cancer incidence and mortality by 75 percent (Reynales-Shigematsu, Rodrigues,
and Lazcano-Ponce 2009). Similar to findings in studies
that explored the cost-effectiveness of HPV vaccination
alone, this set of literature generally finds that adding
HPV vaccination for preadolescent girls to existing or
modified screening programs has the potential to be a
cost-effective strategy, with the vaccine price being a key
factor in determining cost-effectiveness. Despite finding
that HPV vaccination is cost-effective, these studies reiterate the concern over affordability (Canfell and others
2011; Praditsitthikorn and others 2011; Sharma and
others 2011).

Conclusion of Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
The findings from recent cost-effectiveness analyses
clearly indicate that there are promising opportunities
to prevent cervical cancer in different world settings.
HPV vaccination for preadolescent girls and screening
of adult women, even only three times per lifetime, can
avert a significant proportion of cervical cancer cases in
a cost-effective manner. In addition to many other critical inputs to health decisions, such as political will and
cultural acceptability, evidence on the cost-effectiveness
and affordability of HPV vaccination and screening
from rigorous model-based analyses can help to inform
decision makers and stakeholders in their deliberations
on how best to prevent cervical cancer worldwide.

CONCLUSIONS
Cervical cancer remains one of the most common cancers
among women living in LMICs, yet it is a preventable
and treatable cancer. Resource-constrained countries
have been unable to initiate or sustain cytology-based
cervical cancer screening programs because of weak
health care infrastructure and prohibitive cost. There are
two new avenues for cervical cancer prevention:

and VIA. Both tests have their advantages and disadvantages, but the development of a highly reproducible, reliable, and accurate point-of-care HPV
DNA test (or an alternative test yet to be developed
but fulfilling these criteria) will enable women to
be screened and treated in one visit and without the
need for colposcopy and laboratory infrastructure.
HPV DNA testing has shown very promising results;
however, issues of specificity, overtreatment, and
effective triage still need to be resolved.
Screening and vaccinating either separately or
together are shown to be highly cost-effective public
health interventions.

NOTES
The World Bank classifies countries according to four income
groupings. Income is measured using gross national income
per capita, in U.S. dollars, converted from local currency using
the World Bank Atlas method. Classifications as of July 2014
are as follows:
•
•

•

Low-income countries = US$1,045 or less in 2013
Middle-income countries are subdivided:
• Lower-middle-income = US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income = US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries = US$12,746 or more
1. The map and figures in this chapter are based on incidence
and mortality estimates for ages 0–69 years, consistent
with reporting in all DCP3 volumes. Cancer statistics
are estimates for 2012 and have been provided by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer from its
GLOBOCAN 2012 database. Observed population-based
cancer incidence rates were derived from Cancer Incidence
in Five Continents, 10th edition, and for trends over time
from CI5plus (http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx). The
discussion of burden (including risk factors), however,
includes all ages unless otherwise noted. Interventions also
apply to all age groups, except where age ranges or cutoffs
are specified.
2. HDI is a composite of three dimensions of human development: a long and healthy life (life expectancy at birth),
access to knowledge (adult literacy and enrollment at
different educational levels), and standard of living (gross
domestic product adjusted for purchasing power parity).

REFERENCES
• Primary prevention through prophylactic vaccination against the most common HPV types causally
associated with cervical cancer.
• Use of alternative screening tests and strategies for
cervical cancer prevention, namely, HPV DNA testing

Aljunid, S., A. Zafar, S. Saperi, and M. Amrizal. 2010.
“Burden of Disease Associated with Cervical Cancer in
Malaysia and Potential Costs and Consequences of HPV
Vaccination.” Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention
11 (6): 1551–59.

Cervical Cancer

81

Arbyn, M., X. Castellsague, S. de Sanjose, L. Bruni, M. Saraiya,
and others. 2011. “Worldwide Burden of Cervical Cancer in
2008.” Annals of Oncology 22 (12): 2675–86.
Arbyn, M., G. Ronco, A. Anttila, C. J. Meijer, M. Poljak, and
others. 2012. “Evidence Regarding Human Papillomavirus
Testing in Secondary Prevention of Cervical Cancer.”
Vaccine 30 (Suppl. 5): F88–99.
Berkhof, J., J. A. Bogaards, E. Demirel, M. Diaz, M. Sharma,
and others. 2013. “Cost-Effectiveness of Cervical Cancer
Prevention in Central and Eastern Europe and Central
Asia.” Vaccine 31 (S7): H71–79.
Binagwaho, A., C. M. Wagner, M. Gatera, C. Karema, C. T. Nutt,
and others. 2012. “Achieving High Coverage in Rwanda’s
National Human Papillomavirus Vaccination Programme.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization 90 (8): 623–28.
Brisson, M., N. Van de Velde, and M. C. Boily. 2009. “Economic
Evaluation of Human Papillomavirus Vaccination in
Developed Countries.” Public Health Genomics 12 (5–6):
343–51.
Campos, N. G., J. J. Kim, P. E. Castle, J. Ortendahl, M. O’Shea,
and others. 2012. “Health and Economic Impact of HPV
16/18 Vaccination and Cervical Cancer Screening in
Eastern Africa.” International Journal of Cancer 130 (11):
2672–84.
Canfell K., H. Chesson, S. L. Kulasingam, J. Berkhof, M. Diaz,
and J. J. Kim. 2012. “Modelling Preventative Strategies
against Human Papillomavirus-Related Disease in
Developing Countries.” Vaccine 30 (Suppl. 5): F157–67.
Canfell, K., J. F. Shi, J. B. Lew, R. Walker, F. H. Zhao, and
others. 2011. “Prevention of Cervical Cancer in Rural
China: Evaluation of HPV Vaccination and Primary HPV
Screening Strategies.” Vaccine 29 (13): 2487–94.
Castle, P. E., M. H. Stoler, T. C. Wright, Jr., A. Sharma, T. L. Wright,
and others. 2011. “Performance of Carcinogenic Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) Testing and HPV16 or HPV18
Genotyping for Cervical Cancer Screening of Women Aged
25 Years and Older: A Subanalysis of the ATHENA Study.”
The Lancet Oncology 12 (9): 880–90.
Cuzick, J., M. Arbyn, R. Sankaranarayanan, V. Tsu, G. Ronco,
and others. 2008. “Overview of HPV-Based and Other
Novel Options for Cervical Cancer Screening in Developed
and Developing Countries.” Vaccine 206: k29–41.
de Sanjose, S., G. V. Quint, L. Alemany, D. T. Geraets,
J. E. Klaustermeier, and others. 2010. “Human Papillomavirus
Genotype Attribution in Invasive Cervical Cancer:
A Retrospective Cross-Sectional Worldwide Study.” The
Lancet Oncology 11 (11): 1048–56.
Dee, A., and F. A. Howell. 2010. “A Cost-Utility Analysis of
Adding a Bivalent or Quadrivalent HPV Vaccine to the Irish
Cervical Screening Program.” European Journal of Public
Health 20 (2): 213–29.
Demarteau, N., C. H. Tang, H. C. Chen, C. J. Chen, and
G. Van Kriekinge. 2012. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of
the Bivalent Compared with the Quadrivalent Human
Papillomavirus Vaccines in Taiwan.” Value Health 15 (5):
622–31.
Denny, L., L. Kuhn, C. C. Hu, W. Y. Tsai, and T. C. Wright,
Jr. 2010. “Human Papillomavirus–Based Cervical Cancer

82

Cancer

Prevention: Long-Term Results of a Randomized Screening
Trial.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 102 (20): 1557–67.
Denny, L., M. Quinn, and R. Sankaranarayanan. 2006.
“Screening for Cervical Cancer in Developing Countries.”
Vaccine 24 (Suppl. 3): S3/71–77.
Diaz, M., J. J. Kim, G. Albero, S. de Sanjose, G. Clifford, and
others. 2008. “Health and Economic Impact of HPV 16 and
18 Vaccination and Cervical Cancer Screening in India.”
British Journal of Cancer 99 (20): 230–38.
Dockter, J., A. Schroder, C. Hill, L. Guzenski, J. Monsonego, and
others. 2009. “Clinical Performance of the APTIMA HPV
Assay for the Detection of High-Risk HPV and High-Grade
Cervical Lesions.” Journal of Clinical Virology 45 (Suppl. 1):
S55–61.
Ellerbrock, T. V., M. A. Chiasson, T. J. Bush, X. W. Sun,
D. Sawo, and others. 2000. “Incidence of Cervical Squamous
Intraepithelial Lesions in HIV-Infected Women.” Journal of
the American Medical Association 283 (8): 1031–37.
Ezat, S. W., and S. Aljunid. 2010. “Comparative CostEffectiveness of HPV Vaccines in the Prevention of
Cervical Cancer in Malaysia.” Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer
Prevention 11 (4): 943–51.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, and
others. 2013. GLOBOCAN 2012 v1.0, Cancer Incidence
and Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase No. 11.
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.
http://globocan.iarc.fr.
Forouzanfar, M. H., K. J. Foreman, A. M. Delossantos,
R. Lozano, A. D. Lopez, and others. 2011. “Breast and
Cervical Cancer in 187 Countries between 1980 and 2010:
A Systematic Analysis.” The Lancet 378 (9801): 1461–84.
Gakidou, E., S. Nordhagen, and Z. Obermeyer. 2008. “Coverage
of Cervical Cancer Screening in 57 Countries: Low Average
Levels and Large Inequalities.” PLoS Medicine 5 (6): e132.
Goldie, S. J., M. Diaz, D. Constenla, N. Alvis, J. K. Andrus, and
others. 2008. “Mathematical Models of Cervical Cancer
Prevention in Latin America and the Caribbean.” Vaccine
26 (Suppl. 11): L59–72.
Goldie, S. J., M. Diaz, S. Y. Kim, C. E. Levin, H. V. Minh,
and J. J. Kim. 2008. “Mathematical Models of Cervical
Cancer Prevention in the Asia Pacific Region.” Vaccine 26
(Suppl. 12): M17–29.
Goldie, S. J., L. Gaffikin, J. D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, A. GordilloTobar, C. Levin, and others. 2005. “Cost-Effectiveness of
Cervical Cancer Screening in Five Developing Countries.”
New England Journal of Medicine 353 (20): 2158–68.
Goldie, S. J., J. J. Kim, K. E. Kobus, J. Goldhaber-Fiebert,
J. A. Salomon, and others. 2007. “Cost-Effectiveness of HPV
Vaccination in Brazil.” Vaccine 25 (33): 6257–70.
Goldie, S. J., C. Levin, N. R. Mosqueira-Lovon, J. Ortendahl,
J. J. Kim, and others. 2012. “Health and Economic Impact
of HPV 16 and 18 Vaccination of Pre-adolescent Girls
and Cervical Cancer Screening of Adult Women in Peru.”
Revista Panamericana de Salud Pública 32 (6): 426–34.
Goldie, S. J., M. K. O’Shea, N. G. Campos, M. Diaz, S. J. Sweet,
and others. 2008. “Health and Economic Outcomes of HPV
16, 18 Vaccination in 72 GAVI-Eligible Countries.” Vaccine
26 (32): 4080–93.

Hakama, M. 1986. “Cervical Cancer: Risk Groups for
Screening.” IARC Scientific Publications 76: 213–19.
Harper, D. M., E. L. Franco, C. M. Wheeler, A. B. Moscicki,
B. Romanaowski, and others. 2006. “Sustained Efficacy up
to 4–5 Years of a Bivalent L1 Virus-Like Particle Vaccine
against Human Papillomavirus Types 16 and 18: Follow-Up
from a Randomised Control Trial.” The Lancet 367 (9518):
1247–55.
Harris, T. G., R. D. Burk, J. M. Palesky, L. S. Massad,
J. Y. Bang, and others. 2005. “Incidence of Cervical
Squamous Intraepithelial Lesions Associated with HIV
Serostatus, CD4 Cell Counts, and Human Papillomavirus
Test Results.” Journal of the American Medical Association
293 (12): 1471–76.
Herrero, R., P. E. Castle, M. Schiffman, M. C. Bratti,
A. Hildesheim, and others. 2005. “Epidemiologic Profile
of Type-Specific Human Papillomavirus Infection and
Cervical Neoplasia in Guanacaste, Costa Rica.” Journal of
Infectious Diseases 191 (11): 1796–807.
Hutubessy, R., A. Levin, S. Wang, W. Morgan, M. Ally, and
others. 2012. “A Case Study Using the United Republic of
Tanzania: Costing Nationwide HPV Vaccine Delivery Using
the WHO Cervical Cancer Prevention and Control Costing
Tool.” BMC Medicine 10: 136.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer) Working
Group on Cervical Cancer Screening. 1986a. “Summary
Chapter.” In Screening for Cancer of the Uterine Cervix,
edited by M. Hakama, A. B. Miller, and N. E. Day, 133–42.
Lyon: IARC.
———. 1986b. “Screening for Squamous Cervical Cancer:
Duration of Low Risk after Negative Results of Cervical
Cytology and Its Implication for Screening Programmes.”
British Medical Journal 293 (6548): 659–64.
Insinga, R. P., E. J. Dasbach, E. H. Elbasha, A. Puig, and
L. M. Reynales-Shigematsu. 2007. “Cost-Effectiveness of
Quadrivalent Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccination
in Mexico: A Transmission Dynamic Model-Based
Evaluation.” Vaccine 26 (1): 128–39.
Irwin, K. L., M. W. Oberle, and L. Rosero-Bixby. 1991.
“Screening Practices for Cervical and Breast Cancer
in Costa Rica.” Bulletin of the Pan American Health
Organization 25 (1): 16–26.
Jit, M., R. Chapman, O. Hughes, and Y. H. Choi. 2011.
“Comparing Bivalent and Quadrivalent Human
Papillomavirus Vaccines: Economic Evaluation Based on
Transmission Model.” British Medical Journal 343: d5775.
doi:10.1136/bmj.d5775.
Katki, H. A., W. K. Kinney, B. Fetterman, T. Lorey, N. E. Poitras,
and others. 2011. “Cervical Cancer Risk for Women
Undergoing Concurrent Testing for Human Papillomavirus
and Cervical Cytology: A Population-Based Study in
Routine Clinical Practice.” The Lancet Oncology 12 (7):
663–72.
Kim, J. J., M. Brisson, J. Edmunds, and S. J. Goldie. 2008.
“Modeling Cervical Cancer Prevention in Developed
Countries.” Vaccine 26 (11): K76–86.
Kim, J. J., N. G. Campos, M. O’Shea, M. Diaz, and I. Mutyaba.
2013. “Model-Based Impact and Cost-Effectiveness of

Cervical Cancer Prevention in Sub-Saharan Africa.” Vaccine
31 (S5): G60–72.
Kim, J. J., K. E. Kobus, M. Diaz, V. Van Minh, and S. J. Goldie.
2008. “Exploring the Cost-Effectiveness of HPV Vaccination
in Vietnam: Insights for Evidence-Based Cervical Cancer
Prevention Policy.” Vaccine 26 (32): 4015–24.
Kim, J. J., M. Sharma, M. O’Shea, S. Sweet, M. Diaz, and
others. 2013. “Model-Based Impact and Cost-Effectiveness
of Cervical Cancer Prevention in the Middle East and
Northern Africa.” Vaccine 31 (S6): G65–77.
Koutsky, L. A., K. A. Ault, C. M. Wheeler, D. R. Brown,
E. Barr, and others. 2002. “A Controlled Trial of a Human
Papillomavirus Type 16 Vaccine.” New England Journal of
Medicine 372 (2): 1645–51.
Laara, E., N. E. Day, and M. Hakama. 1987. “Trends in
Mortality from Cervical Cancer in the Nordic Countries:
Association with Organised Screening Programs.” The
Lancet 1 (8544): 1247–49.
Ladner J., M. Besson, R. Hampshire, L. Tapert, M. Chirenje,
and others. 2012. “Assessment of Eight HPV Vaccination
Programs Implemented in Lowest Income Countries.”
BMC Public Health 12: 370.
Lazcano-Ponce, E., A. de Ruiz, L. Lopez-Carillo, M. VazquezManriquez, and M. Hernandez-Avila. 1994. “Quality
Control Study on Negative Gynecological Cytology in
Mexico.” Diagnostic Cytopathology 10 (1): 10–14.
Lee, V. J., S. K. Tay, Y. L. Teoh, and M. Y. Tok. 2011. “CostEffectiveness of Different Human Papillomavirus Vaccines
in Singapore.” BMC Public Health 11: 203.
Levin, C. E., J. Sellors, J. F. Shi, L. Ma, Y. L. Qiao, and others.
2010. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Cervical Cancer
Prevention Based on a Rapid Human Papillomavirus
Screening Test in a High-Risk Region of China.”
International Journal of Cancer 127 (6): 1404–11.
Levin, C. E., H. Van Minh, J. Odaga, S. S. Rout, D. N. Ngoc,
and others. 2013. “Delivery Cost of Human Papillomavirus
Vaccination of Young Adolescent Girls in Peru, Uganda
and Viet Nam.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization
91 (8): 585–92.
Mao, C., L. A. Koutsky, K. A. Ault, C. M. Wheeler, D. R. Brown,
and others. 2006. “Efficacy of Human Papillomavirus-16
Vaccine to Prevent Cervical Intraepithelial Neoplasia:
A Randomized Controlled Trial.” Obstetrics and Gynecology
107 (1): 18–27.
Massad, L. S., M. H. Einstein, W. K. Huh, H. A. Katki,
W. K. Kinney, and others. 2013. “Updated Consensus
Guidelines for Management of Abnormal Cervical Cancer
Screening Tests and Cancer Precursors.” Journal of Lower
Genital Tract Disease 17 (5): S1–S27.
National Cancer Workshop. 1989. “The 1988 Bethesda System
for Reporting Cervical/Vaginal Cytologic Diagnosis.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 262 (7):
931–34.
Natunen, K., T. A. Lehtinen, S. Torvinen, and M. Lehtinent.
2013. “Cost-Effectiveness of HPV-Vaccination in Medium
or Low Income Countries with High Cervical Cancer
Incidence—A Systematic Review.” Journal of Vaccines and
Vaccination 4 (1): 2–10.

Cervical Cancer

83

Palefsky, J., H. Minkoff, L. Kalish, A. Levine, H. S. Sacks,
and others. 1999. “Human Papillomavirus Infection and
Cervical Cytology in HIV-Infected and HIV-Uninfected
Rwandan Women.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 12:
1851–61.
Parkin, D. M., M. Almonte, L. Bruni, G. Clifford, M. P. Curado,
and others. 2008. “Burden and Trends of Type-Specific
Human Papillomavirus Infections and Related Diseases
in the Latin America and Caribbean Region.” Vaccine 26
(Suppl. 11): L1–15.
Praditsitthikorn, N., Y. Teerawattananon, S. Tantivess,
S. Limwattananon, A. Riewpaiboon, and others.
2011. “Economic Evaluation of Policy Options for
Prevention and Control of Cervical Cancer in Thailand.”
Pharmacoeconomics 29 (9): 781–806.
Pretorius, R. G., J. L. Belinson, R. J. Burchette, S. Hu, X. Zhang,
and others. 2011. “Regardless of Skill, Performing More
Biopsies Increases the Sensitivity of Colposcopy.” Journal of
Lower Genital Tract Disease 15 (3): 180–88.
Reynales-Shigematsu, L. M., E. R. Rodrigues, and E. LazcanoPonce. 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of a Quadrivalent
Human Papilloma Virus Vaccine in Mexico.” Archives of
Medical Research 40 (6): 503–13.
Roteli-Martins, C., P. Naud, P. De Borba, J. Teixeira, N. De
Carvalho, and others. 2012. “Sustained Immunogenicity and
Efficacy of the HPV-16/18 AS04-Adjuvanted Vaccine: Up to
8.4 Years of Follow-Up.” Human Vaccine Immunotherapy
8 (3): 390–97.
Sahasrabuddhe, V., V. P. Luhn, and N. Wentzensen. 2011.
“Human Papillomavirus and Cervical Cancer: Biomarkers
for Improved Prevention Efforts.” Future Microbiology
6 (9): 1083–98.
Sankaranarayanan, R., B. M. Nene, S. S. Shastri, K. Jayant,
R. Muwonge, and others. 2009. “HPV Screening for Cervical
Cancer in Rural India.” New England Journal of Medicine
360 (14): 1385–94.
Sankaranarayanan, R., and P. Pisani. 1997. “Prevention
Measures in the Third World: Are They Practical?” In New
Developments in Cervical Cancer Screening and Prevention,
edited by E. Franco and J. Monsonego, 70–83. Oxford:
Blackwell Science Ltd.
Sauvaget, C., J. M. Fayette, R. Muwonge, R. Wesley, and
R. Sankaranarayanan. 2011. “Accuracy of Visual Inspection
with Acetic Acid for Cervical Cancer Screening.” International
Journal of Gynecology and Obstetrics 113 (1): 14–24.
Schweizer, J., P. S. Lu, C. W. Mahoney, M. Berard-Bergery,
M. Ho, and others. 2010. “Feasibility Study of a Human
Papillomavirus E6 Oncoprotein Test for Diagnosis of
Cervical Precancer and Cancer.” Journal of Clinical
Microbiology 48 (12): 4646–48.
Sharma, M., J. Ortendahl, E. van der Ham, S. Sy, and J. J. Kim.
2011. “Cost-Effectiveness of Human Papillomavirus
Vaccination and Cervical Cancer Screening in Thailand.”
British Journal of Obstetrics and Gynaecology 119 (2):
166–76.

84

Cancer

Sinanovic, E., J. Moodley, M. A. Barone, S. Mall, S. Cleary, and
others. 2009. “The Potential Cost-Effectiveness of Adding
a Human Papillomavirus Vaccine to the Cervical Cancer
Screening Program in South Africa.” Vaccine 27 (44):
6196–202.
Singh, G. K. 2012. “Rural-Urban Trends and Patterns in
Cervical Cancer Mortality, Incidence, Stage, and Survival
in the United States, 1950–2008.” Journal of Community
Health 37: 217–23.
Singh, D., K. Anastos, D. Hoover, R. Burk, Q. Shi, and others.
2009. “Human Papillomavirus Infection and Cervical
Cytology in HIV-Infected and HIV-Uninfected Rwandan
Women.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 199 (12): 1851–61.
Soerjomataram, I., J. Lortet-Tieulent, D. M. Parkin, J. Ferlay,
C. Mathers, and others. 2012. “Global Burden of Cancer in
2008: Systematic Analysis of Disability-Adjusted Life-Years
in 12 World Regions.” The Lancet 380: 1840–50.
Termrungruanglert, W., P. Havanond, N. Khemapech,
S. Lertmaharit, S. Pongpanich, and others. 2012. “Model for
Predicting the Burden and Cost of Treatment in Cervical
Cancer and HPV-Related Diseases in Thailand.” European
Journal of Gynaecological Oncology 33 (4): 391–94.
The Future II Study Group. 2007. “Quadrivalent Vaccine
against Human Papillomavirus to Prevent High-Grade
Cervical Lesions.” New England Journal of Medicine 356:
1915–27.
Tsu, V., and M. Murray. 2011. “Limited Benefit of HPV
Vaccination for Sexually Active Women in Developing
Countries.” Vaccine 29 (50): 9290–91.
Tsu, V., M. Murray, and S. Franceschi. 2012. “Human
Papillomavirus Vaccination in Low-Resource Countries:
Lack of Evidence to Support Vaccinating Sexually Active
Women.” British Journal of Cancer 107 (9): 1445–50.
Vanni, T., P. Luz, A. Mendes, M. Foss, M. Mesa-Frias, and
others. 2012. “Economic Modelling Assessment of the HPV
Quadrivalent Vaccine in Brazil: A Dynamic IndividualBased Approach.” Vaccine 30 (32): 4866–71.
Villa, L. L., R. L. Costa, C. A. Petta, R. P. Andrade, K. A. Ault,
and others. 2005. “Prophylactic Quadrivalent Human
Papillomavirus (Types 6, 11, 16, and 18) L1 Virus-Like
Particle Vaccine in Young Women: A Randomised DoubleBlind Placebo-Controlled Multicentre Phase II Efficacy
Trial.” The Lancet Oncology 6 (5): 271–78.
Walboomers, J. M., M. V. Jacobs, M. M. Manos, F. X. Bosch,
J. A. Kummer, and others. 1999. “Human Papillomavirus Is
a Necessary Cause of Invasive Cervical Cancer Worldwide.”
Journal of Pathology 189: 12–19.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2012. “Prevention of
Cervical Cancer through Screening and Using Visual
Inspection with Acetic Acid (VIA) and Treatment with
Cryotherapy.” WHO, Geneva.
Wright, T. C., and R. J. Kurman. 1994. “A Critical Review of
the Morphologic Classification Systems of Preinvasive
Lesions of the Cervix: The Scientific Basis for Shifting the
Paradigm.” Papillomavirus Report 5: 175–82.

Chapter

5

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection,
and Treatment
Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan, Kunnambath Ramadas,
Hemantha Amarasinghe, Sujha Subramanian, and
Newell Johnson

INTRODUCTION
Oral cancer is the 11th most common cancer in the
world, accounting for an estimated 300,000 new cases
and 145,000 deaths in 2012 and 702,000 prevalent cases
over a period of five years (old and new cases) (tables 5.1
and 5.2) (Bray and others 2013; Ferlay and others 2013).
For this chapter, oral cancers include cancers of the
mucosal lip, tongue, gum, floor of the mouth, palate, and
mouth, corresponding to the International Classification
of Diseases, 10th revision [ICD-10], codes C00, C02,
C03, C04, C05, and C06, respectively. Two-thirds of
the global incidence of oral cancer occurs in low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs); half of those cases
are in South Asia. India alone accounts for one-fifth of
all oral cancer cases and one-fourth of all oral cancer
deaths (Ferlay and others 2013).
Tobacco use, in any form, and excessive alcohol use
are the major risk factors for oral cancer. With dietary
deficiencies, these factors cause more than 90 percent
of oral cancers. Preventing tobacco and alcohol use and
increasing the consumption of fruits and vegetables can
potentially prevent the vast majority of oral cancers
(Sankaranarayanan and others 2013). When primary
prevention fails, early detection through screening and
relatively inexpensive treatment can avert most deaths.
However, oral cancer continues to be a major cancer

in India, East Asia, Eastern Europe, and parts of South
America (Forman and others 2013), where organized
prevention and early detection efforts are lacking. This
chapter discusses the epidemiology, prevention, early
detection, and treatment of oral cancers, as well as the
cost-effectiveness of interventions.

ORAL CANCER: INCIDENCE, MORTALITY, AND
SURVIVAL
Incidence and Mortality1
Oral cancer incidence and mortality are high in India;
Papua New Guinea; and Taiwan, China, where chewing of betel quids with tobacco or without tobacco or
areca nut chewing is common, as well as in Eastern
Europe, France, and parts of South America (Brazil
and Uruguay), where tobacco smoking and alcohol
consumption are high. The age-standardized incidence rates for men are, on average, twice as high as
those for women (tables 5.1 and 5.2). Incidence rates
do not follow a particular pattern from low- to highincome countries (HICs), when countries are grouped
into wealth strata (figure 5.1). In selected countries
where some reliable cancer registries exist, India is
highest and Belarus is lowest, with incidence rates
varying by more than five times in men and women.

Corresponding author: Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan, MD, International Agency for Research on Cancer, SankarR@iarc.fr

85

Table 5.1 Oral Cancer in Men (All Ages): Global Incidence, Mortality, and Prevalence, World Health Organization
Geographic Classification, 2012
Incidence

Mortality

Prevalence

Population

Number

ASR (W)

Number

ASR (W)

Number

Five-year

World

198,975

5.5

97,919

2.7

198,267

467,157

More developed regions

68,042

7

23,380

2.3

67,978

195,233

Less developed regions

130,933

5

74,539

2.8

130,289

271,924

WHO Africa region

8,009

3.4

5,026

2.2

7,763

18,446

WHO Americas region

31,898

5.9

8,532

1.5

31,805

94,953

WHO East Mediterranean region

11,601

5.1

6,185

2.8

11,533

27,236

WHO Europe region

45,567

7.1

18,621

2.8

45,499

118,151

WHO South-East Asia region

70,816

8.9

45,247

5.7

70,667

122,976

WHO Western Pacific region

31,013

2.7

14,292

1.2

30,929

85,233

Africa

10,230

3.3

6,083

2.1

9,961

23,560

Latin America and Caribbean

12,988

4.6

5,244

1.9

12,918

32,424

Asia

111,994

5.2

65,045

3

111,683

230,389

Europe

42,573

7.5

17,598

3

42,539

111,347

Oceania

2,280

9.6

661

2.7

2,279

6,908

Source: Incidence/mortality data: Ferlay and others 2013. Prevalence data: Bray and others 2013.
Note: ASR (W) = age-standardized incidence rate per 100,000 population, for the world population structure; WHO = World Health Organization.

Table 5.2 Oral Cancer in Women (All Ages): Global Incidence, Mortality, and Prevalence, World Health
Organization Geographic Classification, 2012
Incidence

Mortality

Prevalence

Population

Number

ASR (W)

Number

ASR (W)

Number

Five-year

World

101,398

2.5

47,409

1.2

100,784

234,992

More developed regions

32,781

2.6

9,908

0.6

32,683

93,180

Less developed regions

68,617

2.5

37,501

1.4

68,101

141,812

WHO Africa region

5,475

2

3,504

1.4

5,349

12,766

WHO Americas region

17,302

2.6

4,271

0.6

17,204

48,526

WHO East Mediterranean region

9,080

4.1

4,812

2.2

8,993

21,570

WHO Europe region

20,366

2.4

6,556

0.7

20,305

51,933

WHO South-East Asia region

32,648

3.9

20,487

2.5

32,482

58,034

WHO Western Pacific region

16,511

1.3

7,776

0.6

16,435

42,123

Africa

7,046

2

4,258

1.3

6,892

16,409

Latin America and Caribbean

7,645

2.2

2,381

0.7

7,586

17,813

Asia

56,856

2.5

32,363

1.4

56,549

117,362

Europe

18,843

2.5

6,033

0.7

18,789

48,653

Oceania

1,351

5.3

484

1.9

1,350

4,042

Sources: Incidence/mortality data: Ferlay and others 2013. Prevalence data: Bray and others 2013.
Note: ASR (W) = age-standardized incidence rate per 100,000 population, for the world population structure; WHO = World Health Organization.

86

Cancer

The estimated age-standardized incidence rates of oral
cancer also vary among countries in different regions
(maps 5.1 and 5.2).
The buccal (cheek) mucosa is the most common site
for oral cancer in South and Southeast Asia; in all other
regions, the tongue is the most common site (Forman and
others 2013). Regional variations in incidence and the site
of occurrence relate to the major causes, which are alcohol
and smoking in Western countries, and betel quid and
tobacco chewing in South and Southeast Asia (Lambert
and others 2011). Oral cancer mortality rates range
between 1 and 15 per 100,000 persons in different regions;
mortality rates exceed 10 per 100,000 in Eastern European
countries, such as the Czech Republic, Hungary, and the
Slovak Republic (Ferlay and others 2013). Oral cancer
mortality rates are influenced by oral cancer incidence,
access to treatment, and variations in site distribution.
The observed trends in incidence and mortality
among men and women are closely correlated with
the patterns and trends in tobacco and alcohol use.
An increasing trend in incidence has been reported
in Karachi, Pakistan (Bhurgri and others 2006), and
in Taiwan, China (Tseng 2013), caused by increases in
tobacco and areca nut chewing and alcohol drinking.
Oral cancer incidence and mortality rates have been
steadily declining over the past two decades because of
declining smoking prevalence and alcohol consumption
in the United States (Brown, Check, and Devesa 2011).

However, a recent increase in cancers at the base of the
tongue,possiblydrivenbythehumanpapillomavirus(HPV),
has been observed in white men in the United States
(Saba and others 2011).
Oral cancer incidence and mortality rates have been
declining steadily in most European countries over
the past two decades; until recently, rates had been

Figure 5.1 Age-Standardized Incidence and Mortality Rates of Oral
Cancer, by World Bank Income Classification, 2012
Men

Women

Low-income
Lower-middle-income
(except India)
Upper-middle-income
(except China)
High-income
China
India
20

10
0
10
20
Age-standardized rate (w) per 100,000, 0–69 years
Incidence

Mortality

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.

Map 5.1 Age-Standardized Incidence Rates of Oral Cancer in Men, 2012
IBRD 41382 | FEBRUARY 2015

Lip, Oral Cavity Cancer in Men,
0–69 years
ASR (World) Indcidence
Greater than 108
76–108
46–76
31–46
Less than 31
No data

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: ASR = Age-Standardized Rate.

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

87

Map 5.2 Age-Standardized Incidence Rates of Oral Cancer in Women, 2012

Lip, Oral Cavity Cancer in
Women, 0–69 years
ASR (World) Indcidence
Greater than 38
28–38
2–28
1.4–2
Fewer than 1.4
No data

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: ASR = Age-Standardized Rate.

increasing in some Central European countries, including Hungary and the Slovak Republic, reflecting changes
in alcohol and tobacco consumption (Bonifazi and others 2011). Oral cancer mortality has declined steadily in
France since reaching a peak in the early 1990s, and the
decline correlates with the reduction in per capita alcohol consumption. Incidence and mortality have been
stable in the Nordic countries, the Russian Federation,
and the United Kingdom. Mortality rates have been
steadily declining in Australia and Hong Kong SAR,
China, but increasing in Japan and the Republic of Korea
(Yako-Suketomo and Matsuda 2010).
Survival
In the United States, five-year survival improved by
more than 11 percentage points between 1992 and 2006
(Pulte and Brenner 2010) and is now approximately
65 percent (Howlader and others 2010; Ries and others 2008). In Europe, it is approximately 50 percent
(Sant and others 2009). In India, five-year survival is
less than 35 percent; in China, the Republic of Korea,
Pakistan, Singapore, and Thailand, it ranges between
32 and 54 percent (Sankaranarayanan and others 2010;
Sankaranarayanan and Swaminathan 2011). Overall, the
five-year survival for early, localized cancers exceeds 80
percent and falls to less than 20 percent when regional
lymph nodes are involved.

88

Cancer

ORAL CANCER: RISK FACTORS AND
PREVENTION
The major causes of oral cancer worldwide remain
tobacco in its many different forms, heavy consumption of alcohol, and, increasingly, infection with certain
types of HPV. Although the relative contribution of risk
factors varies from population to population, oral cancer is predominantly a disease of poor people (Johnson
and others 2011). Prevention of this devastating disease
can come from fundamental changes in socioeconomic
status, as well as from actions to reduce the demand,
production, marketing, and use of tobacco products
and alcohol (Johnson and others 2011). A healthy diet,
good oral and sexual hygiene, and awareness of the
signs and symptoms of disease are important. Success
depends on political will, intersectoral action, and
culturally sensitive public health messages disseminated through educational campaigns and mass media
initiatives.

Smokeless and Smoking Tobacco Use
Smokeless tobacco in the form of betel quid, oral snuff,
and betel quid substitutes (locally called guktha, nass,
naswar, khaini, mawa, mishri, and gudakhu) increases
the risk of oral precancerous lesions and oral cancer
between 2-fold and 15-fold (Gupta and others 2011;

Gupta, Ariyawardana, and Johnson 2013; IARC 2004b,
2007; Javed and others 2010; Johnson and others
2011; Somatunga and others 2012). In most areas,
betel quid consists of tobacco, areca nut, slaked lime,
catechu, and several condiments, wrapped in a betel
leaf. In recent years, small, attractive, and inexpensive
sachets of betel quid substitutes containing a flavored
and sweetened dry mixture of areca nut, catechu, and
slaked lime with tobacco (gutkha) or without tobacco
(pan masala), often claiming to be safer products, have
become widely available and are increasingly used by
young people, particularly in India. These products
have been strongly implicated in oral submucous
fibrosis (OSMF), which places individuals at high risk
for malignancy.
More than 50 percent of oral cancers in India,
Sudan, and the Republic of South Sudan, and about
4 percent of oral cancers in the United States, are
attributable to smokeless tobacco products. Smokeless
tobacco use among young people is increasing in South
Asia, with the marketing of conveniently packaged
products made from areca nut and tobacco; as a consequence, oral precancerous conditions in young adults
have increased significantly (Gupta and others 2011;
Sinha and others 2011).
Consistent evidence from many studies indicates
that tobacco smoking in any form increases the risk
of oral cancer by twofold to tenfold in men and
women (IARC 2004a). Risk increases substantially with
duration and frequency of tobacco use; risk among
former smokers is consistently lower than among
current smokers, and there is a trend of decreasing
risk with increasing number of years since quitting.
Use of smokeless tobacco and alcohol in combination
with tobacco smoking greatly increases the risk of
oral cancer. The biological plausibility is provided by
the identification of several carcinogens in tobacco,
the most abundant and strongest being tobacco-specific N-nitrosamines, such as N-nitrosonornicotine
and 4-(methylnitrosamino)-1-(3-pyridyl)-1-butanone
(IARC 2007). These are formed by N-nitrosation of
nicotine, the major alkaloid responsible for addiction
to tobacco.
The fact that more than 80 percent of oral cancers can
be attributed to tobacco and/or alcohol consumption
justifies regular oral examinations targeting tobacco and
alcohol users, as well as prevention efforts focusing on
tobacco and alcohol control (Radoi and others 2013).
The World Health Organization Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control, an evidence-based international
treaty, aims to reduce the demand for tobacco globally by
price, tax, and non-price measures. (See chapter 10 for a
full discussion of tobacco control.)

Areca Nut Chewing
Areca nut or betel nut, because it is often wrapped in
betel leaf, is now regarded as a type 1 carcinogen (IARC
2004b, 2007). It is chewed raw, dried, or roasted, or as
part of betel quid, by millions of people in Asia; its use
is spreading across the Pacific, as well as in emigrant
Asian communities worldwide. Cheap, prepackaged
areca nut products, such as pan masala, are of recent
concern, especially among youth. The inclusion of
tobacco in the betel quid adds considerably to the carcinogenicity (Amarasinghe and others 2010; Johnson
and others 2011).

Alcohol Use
Epidemiological studies indicate that drinking alcoholic
beverages increases the risk of oral cancer twofold to sixfold and is an independent risk factor (IARC 2010), with
risk increasing with quantity consumed. The risk varies
by population and individual and subsite within the oral
cavity (Radoi and others 2013). The combined use of
alcohol and tobacco has a multiplicative effect on oral
cancer risk. The various pathways by which alcohol may
exert carcinogenic influence include topical exposure
leading to a direct effect on cell membranes, altered cell
permeability, variation in enzymes that metabolize alcohol, and/or systemic effects, such as nutritional deficiency,
immunological deficiency, and disturbed liver function.
A recent review failed to identify an association between
the use of mouthwash containing alcohol and oral cancer
risk, or any significant trend in risk with increasing daily
use of mouthwash (Gandini and others 2012).

Poor Nutrition
High consumption of fruits and vegetables is associated
with a reduction of 40–50 percent in the risk of oral
cancer (Lucenteforte and others 2009; Pavia and others
2006; World Cancer Research Fund/American Institute
for Cancer Research 2007). In HICs, selected aspects of
diet—such as lack of vegetables and fruits—may account
for 15–20 percent of oral cancers; this proportion is
likely to be higher in LMICs. Chemoprevention studies
have not established a preventive effect of retinoid and
carotenoid dietary supplements (Chainani-Wu, Epstein,
and Touger-Decker 2011; Wrangle and Khuri 2007).

Other Risk Factors
Genetic Factors
Most carcinogens are metabolized through the
cytochrome p450 system in the liver. If this system is

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

89

defective by virtue of inheriting a particular form of
the gene (a polymorphism), the risk of many cancers is
enhanced. This risk is particularly important with oral
and other head and neck cancers, although the relative
risks are modest at 1.5 or lower (that is, less than a doubling of risk) (Lu, Yu, and Du 2011).
Polymorphisms in alcohol-metabolizing enzymes
also contribute to the risk. Individuals with the fastmetabolizing version (allele) of alcohol dehydrogenase
(ADH3[1-1]) have a greater risk of developing oral cancer in the presence of alcoholic beverage consumption
than those with the slow-metabolizing forms; this higher
risk re-enforces the role of acetaldehyde as the carcinogen involved (Harty and others 1997).
Mate Drinking
Mate, a leaf infusion that is commonly drunk many
times a day in parts of South America—usually very
hot—appears to enhance the risk of oral cancer by a
small amount (Deneo-Pellegrini and others 2012).
Viruses
Recent evidence suggests that HPV infection may be
an independent risk factor for cancer of the base of
the tongue, tonsils, and elsewhere in the oropharynx.
HPV may modulate the process of carcinogenesis in
some tobacco- and alcohol-induced oral and oropharyngeal cancers, and it may act as the primary
oncogenic agent for inducing carcinogenesis among
nonsmokers (Johnson and others 2011; Prabhu and
Wilson 2013). Growing evidence suggests that such
oropharyngeal infections can be sexually transmitted
(Heck and others 2010).
Chronic Trauma
It now seems clear that chronic trauma, from sharp
teeth, restorations, or dentures, contributes to oral cancer risk, although this higher risk commonly occurs only
in the presence of the other local risk factors (Piemonte,
Lazos, and Brunotto 2010).

ORAL CANCER: NATURAL HISTORY
Oral cancer has a long preclinical phase that consists
of well-documented precancerous lesions. The precancerous lesions include homogeneous leukoplakia,
nonhomogeneous leukoplakia, verrucous leukoplakia, erythroplakia, OSMF, lichen planus, and chronic
traumatic ulcers. The estimated annual frequency
of malignant transformation of oral precancerous
lesions ranges from 0.13 percent to 2.2 percent
(Amagasa, Yamashiro, and Uzawa 2011; Napier and
Speight 2008).

90

Cancer

Very early preclinical invasive cancers (early-stage
cancers without symptoms) present as painless small
ulcers, nodular lesions, or growths. These changes can
be easily seen and are clinically detectable through
careful visual inspection and palpation of the oral
mucosa. Early, localized oral cancers—less than four
centimeters—that have not spread to the regional lymph
nodes can be effectively treated and cured with surgery
or radiotherapy alone, with no functional or cosmetic
defects, resulting in five-year survival rates exceeding
80 percent.
Leukoplakia is a white plaque that may be categorized clinically as homogeneous or nonhomogeneous.
Homogeneous lesions are thin, flat, uniform, smooth,
and white. Nonhomogeneous lesions may have a white
and red appearance or tiny, white, pinhead-size raised
nodules on a reddish background or a proliferative,
warty appearance. Erythroplakia presents as a red patch
with smooth or granular surface that cannot be characterized clinically or pathologically as any other definable
disease (Warnakulasuriya, Johnson, and Van Der Waal
2007). Erythroplakia has a higher probability than leukoplakia to harbor occult invasive cancer and to undergo
malignant transformation.
Oral lichen planus may present as interlacing white
lines (known as Wickham’s striae) with a reddish border,
or as a mix of reddish and ulcerated areas.
OSMF, mostly restricted to people of Indian subcontinent origin and in certain Pacific islands such as
Mariana Islands, presents with a burning sensation,
blanching of the oral mucosa, and intolerance to spicy
food. Stiffening and atrophy of the oral and pharyngeal
mucosa occurs as the disease progresses, leading to
reduced mouth opening and difficulty in swallowing
and speaking.
Palatal lesions are seen in populations who smoke
with the lighted end of the tobacco product inside the
mouth, known as reverse smoking, resulting in white or
mixed reddish-white lesions of the palate.
A higher risk of malignant transformation may be
associated with the following factors: female gender,
lesions of long duration, large precancerous lesions,
precancerous lesions in nonusers of tobacco, tongue
and floor of mouth lesions, nonhomogeneous lesions,
and lesions showing epithelial dysplasia and aneuploidy
(Hsue and others 2007; Napier and Speight 2008).
However, it is impossible to predict with certainty which
precancerous lesion will become malignant during
follow-up in patients. The malignant transformation of
precancerous lesions can be prevented by interventions,
such as avoiding exposure to tobacco use and alcohol
drinking, and in selected instances, by excision of the
lesions.

ORAL CANCER SCREENING: ACCURACY,
EFFICACY, AND POTENTIAL HARMS
Although an affordable, acceptable, easy to use, accurate, and effective screening test for oral cancer is
available in high-risk countries, a decision to introduce
population-based screening should take into account
the level of health service development and available
resources to meet the increased treatment demand that
screening generates. The target population for oral cancer screening consists of those age 30 years and older
who use tobacco and/or alcohol.
Visual screening of the oral cavity has been widely
evaluated for its feasibility, safety, acceptability, accuracy
to detect oral precancerous lesions and cancer, and efficacy and cost-effectiveness in reducing oral cancer mortality (Johnson and others 2011; Sankaranarayanan and
others 2005; Sankaranarayanan and others 2013). Visual
screening involves systematic visual and physical examination of the intraoral mucosa under bright light for
signs of oral potentially malignant disorders (OPMDs),
as well as early oral cancer, followed by careful inspection and digital palpation of the neck for any enlarged
lymph nodes. It is a provider-dependent, subjective test;
accordingly, its performance in detecting lesions varies
among providers. Comprehensive knowledge of the oral
anatomy, the natural history of oral carcinogenesis, and
the clinico-pathological features of the OPMDs and preclinical cancers are important prerequisites for efficient
providers of oral visual screening.
The potential harms of oral visual screening may
include additional diagnostic investigations, such as
incisional or excisional biopsy; anxiety associated with
false-positive screening tests; detection and treatment of
biologically insignificant conditions that may have no
impact on oral cancer incidence; and false reassurance
from false-negative tests.

Visual Screening by Health Care Personnel
A variety of health care personnel—including dentists,
general practitioners, oncologists, surgeons, nurses,
and auxiliary health workers—may provide oral visual
screening after training (Ramadas and others 2008).
Sensitivity ranges from 40 percent to 93 percent,
and specificity ranges from 50 percent to 99 percent
for detecting precancerous lesions and early asymptomatic oral cancers (Downer and others 2004;
Mathew and others 1997; Mehta and others 1986;
Warnakulasuriya and others 1984; Warnakulasuriya
and Nanayakkara 1991).
A significant reduction of 34 percent in oral cancer
mortality among a high-risk group of tobacco or alcohol

users following three rounds of oral visual screening
has been demonstrated in a cluster-randomized controlled trial in India (Sankaranarayanan and others
2005; Sankaranarayanan and others 2013). A 15-year
follow-up found sustained reduction in oral cancer
mortality, with larger reductions in those adhering
to repeated screening rounds; there was a 38 percent
reduction in oral cancer incidence (95 percent confidence interval [CI] 8–59 percent), and an 81 percent
reduction in oral cancer mortality (95 percent CI
69–89 percent) in tobacco and/or alcohol users who
were screened four times (Sankaranarayanan and others
2013). The studies (Sankaranarayanan and others 2005;
Sankaranarayanan and others 2013) were the basis for
the conclusions of the recent Cochrane Collaboration
Review (Brocklehurst and others 2013) and an American
Dental Association (ADA) expert panel review on
population-based oral cancer screening (Rethman
and others 2010). The ADA review recommended that
clinicians look for signs of precancerous lesions or
early-stage cancers while performing routine visual
and tactile screening in all subjects, particularly in
those who use tobacco or alcohol or both; the panel
also concluded that the life-saving benefits for subjects
with treatable lesions were more important than the
potential harms incurred by those with benign or nonprogressive lesions (Rethman and others 2010). The
Cochrane Review (Walsh and others 2013) concluded
that evidence suggests that a visual examination as part
of a population-based screening program reduces the
mortality rate of oral cancer in high-risk individuals; in
addition, it could result in diagnoses of oral cancer at
an earlier stage of disease and improvement in survival
rates across the population as a whole (Brocklehurst and
others 2013).
The U.S. Preventive Services Task Force released a
draft Recommendation Statement, which stated that for
adults age 18 years or older seen in primary care settings,
the current evidence is insufficient to assess the balance
of benefits and harms of screening for oral cancer in
asymptomatic adults. However, this statement overlooks
the benefits of early detection of oral cancers among
users of tobacco or alcohol or both, as well as other
benign conditions whose early detection may improve
oral health. Discouraging oral visual examination in
primary care is clearly not in the interests of oral cancer
control and improving oral health (Edwards 2013).
Self-Examination and Other Screening Methods
Although mouth self-examination using a mirror has
been evaluated as a screening test in some studies
(Elango and others 2011; Mathew and others 1995; Scott

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

91

and others 2010), whether it could lead to reductions in
oral cancer mortality is not known. There is insufficient
evidence to recommend the routine use of other oral
screening tests, such as toluidine blue staining, chemiluminescence, tissue fluorescence imaging, tissue fluorescent spectroscopy, and salivary analysis and cytology for
primary screening of oral cancer (Johnson and others
2011; Patton, Epstein, and Kerr 2008; Richards 2010; Su
and others 2010).
Despite the high risk of oral cancer in the Indian
subcontinent, no national or regional screening programs exist in the region. The only large-scale, ongoing,
national oral cancer screening programs are in Cuba and
Taiwan, China.
• The Cuban program has been in existence since 1984.
An evaluation conducted in 1994 indicated that 12–26
percent of the target population has been screened
annually, but less than 30 percent of screen-positive
individuals complied with referrals (Fernandez and
others 1995). The program was reorganized in 1996,
with the target age raised from 15 years to 35 years,
screening intervals increased from one to three years,
and the referral system revamped. No further formal
evaluation has been conducted, but there has been no
reduction in oral cancer incidence or mortality rates
in Cuba over the past three decades. The outcomes
from the Cuban program emphasize that screening programs without efficient organization and
resources are not an effective use of limited resources.
• Oral cancer screening was initiated in Taiwan, China,
in 2004, targeting those age 18 years and older who
were smokers or betel nut chewers; the target population for oral cancer screening was revised in 2010 to
cover smokers or chewers age 30 years and older. The
screening program has led to almost half of the oral
cancers diagnosed in stages I and II, with a declining
trend in oral cancer mortality rates.

ORAL CANCER: EARLY CLINICAL DIAGNOSIS
AND STAGING
Primary care dental and general practitioners should
play a major role in referring patients to cancer treatment
facilities for early diagnosis and treatment. Improving
the skills of these primary care doctors is essential to
improving prospects for early diagnosis, particularly
among patients who use tobacco or alcohol in any form.
Routine biopsy in those clinically presenting with features of precancerous lesions may lead to early diagnosis
of underlying invasive oral cancer. In addition to history, physical examination, and biopsy, a simultaneous

92

Cancer

assessment of the upper aerodigestive tract is necessary
because patients with oral cancer have a high risk of
cancers developing in other head and neck sites and in
the lungs.
Once a diagnosis of oral cancer is confirmed, staging assessment is completed and treatment is planned.
The Union for International Cancer Control Tumor,
Nodes, Metastasis (TNM) staging system is widely used
for staging oral cancer (Patel and Shah 2005; Sobin
and Wittekind 2002) (table 5.3): T indicates the size
and extent of spread of the primary tumor, N indicates
the extent spread to the regional lymph nodes in the
neck, and M indicates the spread to distant organs.
The TNM categorization is further grouped into stages
0 through IV, which denote increasing severity of disease
and decreasing survival.
Oral cancer staging involves assessing the clinical
extent of disease through physical examination, biopsies, and imaging investigations, including X-rays of
the mandible, maxillary sinuses, and chest; computerized tomography (CT) scans; magnetic resonance
imaging (MRI); and positron emission tomography
(PET) imaging, depending on what resources are available. Advanced imaging techniques such as CT, MRI,
and PET may be useful in more accurately evaluating
local spread, such as invasion of muscles, bone, and
cartilage, and lymph node metastases, as well as in
planning treatment, but these investigations are seldom
feasible in LMICs.

ORAL CANCER: MANAGEMENT
Oral cancer is predominantly a loco-regional disease
that tends to infiltrate adjacent bone and soft tissues
and spreads to the regional lymph nodes in the neck.
Distant metastasis is uncommon at the time of diagnosis.
A thorough inspection and palpation of the oral cavity
and examination of the neck is mandatory. CT and MRI
imaging are widely used to assess the extent of involvement of adjacent structures, such as bones and soft tissues. Surgery and radiotherapy are the main treatment
modalities. Given the skills, expertise, and infrastructure
required for staging and treatment with minimal physical, functional, and cosmetic morbidity, oral cancer treatment is usually provided in specialized cancer hospitals,
such as comprehensive cancer centers, or in hospitals at
the highest level of health services, third-level centers.
Treatment of Early-Stage Oral Cancer (Stages I and II)
Surgery and radiotherapy are widely used for the
treatment of early oral cancer, either as single modalities
or in combination. The choice of modality depends on

Table 5.3 Clinical Staging of Oral Cancer, Treatment Modalities, and Prognosis, by Clinical Stage
Composite
stage

Five-year
survival (percent)

Extent of disease

TNM category

Treatment options

0

Cancer is limited to the epithelium (carcinoma
in-situ) (Tis) and has not spread to deeper layers and
nearby organs, regional (neck) lymph nodes (N0), or
distant organs (M0)

TisN0M0

Limited surgical excision

~100

I

Primary tumor measures 2 cm or less (T1) and has
not spread to regional organs, regional (neck) lymph
nodes (N0), or distant organs (M0)

T1N0M0

Radical surgery or radical
radiotherapy

> 90

II

Primary tumor is larger than 2 cm and smaller than
4 cm (T2) and has not spread to regional organs,
regional (neck) lymph nodes (N0), or distant organs
(M0)

T2N0M0

Radical surgery or radical
radiotherapy; in selected
cases, combination
therapy

> 70

III

Primary tumor measures > 4 cm (T3) and has not
spread to neck nodes (N0) or distant organs (M0); or
tumor is any size (T1 to T3) and has spread to one
lymph node measuring 3 cm or less on the same side
of the of the neck (N1) as the primary tumor and the
cancer has not spread to distant organs (M0)

T3N0M0

Combined modality
treatment with surgery
and/or radiotherapy and/
or chemotherapy

30–40

Tumor involves nearby structures, including the
mandible, tongue muscles, maxillary sinus, and skin
(T4); or tumor is any size but involves one lymph
node measuring 3–6 cm on the same side of the
neck (N2a) or one lymph node measuring no more
than 6 cm on the opposite side of the neck (N2b), or
two or more lymph nodes no more than 6 cm on any
side of the neck (N2c); or lymph node involvement
measuring more than 6 cm (N3); or distant
metastases (M1)

T4, N0, or N1, M0

Multimodality
management treatment
with surgery and/
or radiotherapy and/
or chemotherapy for
cancers without distant
metastases; palliative
radiotherapy and/or
chemotherapy and pain/
symptom relief measures

5–10

IV

T1 to T3, N1, M0

Any T, N2, or N3 M0
Any T, any N, M1

20–25

<5

Source: Staging: Sobin and Wittekind 2002.
Note: cm = centimeter; TNM = Tumor, Node, Metastasis.

the location of the tumor, cosmetic and functional outcomes, age of the patient, associated illnesses, patient’s
preference, and the availability of expertise.
Most early-stage oral cancers can be locally excised
or treated with radiotherapy, with no or minimal functional and physical morbidity. Elective neck dissection
to remove lymph nodes may be considered in selected
cases, such as patients with stage I tongue cancer and
stage II cancers at other oral sites, who may be at high
risk of microscopic but not clinically evident involvement of the neck nodes (N0) (El-Naaj and others 2011;
Hicks, Jr., and others 1997; Vijayakumar and others
2011; Woolgar 2006; Zwetyenga and others 2003).
External beam radiotherapy and brachytherapy—
using radioactive sources implanted in the tumor—
either alone or in combination, is an alternative to
surgery for early-stage oral cancers. Excellent outcomes
have been demonstrated following brachytherapy alone
or in combination with external beam radiotherapy

for small tumors (Fujita and others 1999; Marsiglia
and others 2002; Wendt and others 1990). Deep infiltrative cancers have a high propensity to spread to
regional lymph nodes; therefore, brachytherapy alone,
which does not treat regional nodes adequately, is
not recommended. Newer techniques, such as threedimensional conformal radiotherapy and intensity
modulated radiotherapy, can minimize the side effects
of radiotherapy by delivering the radiation dose to the
tumor more precisely and accurately while avoiding
healthy surrounding tissues. However, these treatments
require advanced equipment and are more expensive
than conventional radiotherapy.
Treatment of Locally Advanced Tumors of the Oral
Cavity (Stages III and IV)
Locally advanced tumors are aggressive, and locoregional treatment failure rates are high. A combined

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

93

modality approach integrating surgery, radiotherapy
with or without chemotherapy, and planned and executed by a multidisciplinary team is always preferred.
Appropriate importance should be given to factors
such as functional and cosmetic outcomes and the
available expertise. Surgery followed by postoperative
radiotherapy is the preferred modality for patients with
deep infiltrative tumors and those with bone infiltration
(Lundahl and others 1998). Postoperative concurrent
chemo-radiation has been found to be superior to radiotherapy alone in those with surgical margins showing
cancerous changes indicating incomplete excision of
the tumor (Bernier and others 2004; Cooper and others
2004). The use of chemotherapy prior to surgery may
eliminate the need to remove the mandible—a major
benefit—although it does not confer a survival benefit
(Licitra and others 2003).
Primary radiotherapy, with or without chemotherapy, is a reasonable option for locally advanced tumors
without bone involvement, especially for patients who
have inoperable disease, who are medically unfit for surgery, or who are likely to have unacceptable functional
and cosmetic outcomes with surgery. Incorporating
chemotherapy with surgery or radiotherapy is useful
in younger patients who are in good general condition,
increasing survival by about 5 percentage points at
five years (Blanchard and others 2011).
Side Effects of Radiotherapy
Side effects may occur during or immediately following
radiotherapy—acute reactions—or months to years
after treatment. Acute reactions are self-limiting and
generally resolve within two to three weeks. These
reactions are caused by the inflammation of tissues
within the radiotherapy treatment field. Alteration of
taste, pain, difficulty in eating, mucosal ulceration of
the oral cavity, bacterial and fungal infections, increased
thickness of saliva, discoloration and peeling of the
overlying skin, loss of hair within the field of treatment, and edema of the skin are the major side effects.
Maintenance of good oral hygiene, frequent cleaning of
the oral cavity with soda-saline solution, analgesics, and
control of infection are recommended for conservative
management of these side effects. Good hydration, a
high-calorie diet, and avoidance of spicy and hot food
are recommended.
Late effects of radiation are related to dose per fraction, total dose, and the type and volume of the tissue
irradiated. Late effects include loss of hair within the
irradiated area, dry mouth (xerostomia), thickening of
the skin, dental caries, and, rarely, necrosis of the mandible or maxillary bone.

94

Cancer

Complications of Surgery
The common complications of oral surgery are infection, collection of blood (hematoma), skin necrosis,
flap failure, and wound breakdown. Resorption of
bone, osteomyelitis, and salivary fistula can also occur.
Complications are more frequent when neck dissection
is part of the surgery. Fatal hemorrhage can occur if the
carotid artery is exposed in the wound. Resection of the
structures can interfere with cosmetic appearance and
functions such as speech, swallowing, and airway. These
complications can be minimized through reconstructive
surgery and by good prosthetic rehabilitation.

Posttreatment Follow-Up
Patients with oral cancer are at risk for developing
loco-regional recurrences and second malignancies.
After completion of the treatment, patients should be
followed up at regular intervals to detect any signs of
recurrence. Patients should be encouraged to give up
tobacco and alcohol and know the signs and symptoms
of recurrence.

Prognosis
Lymph node involvement and tumor size are the most
important prognostic factors. Data for the United States
for 1975–2007 report a five-year survival for all stages of
oral cancer of 60.9 percent, 82.5 percent for early-stage
disease, and 54.7 percent for locally advanced oral
cavity cancer (Ries and others 2008). The reported fiveyear overall survival rates for oral cancer for all stages
combined from populations in LMICs such as China,
Cuba, India, Pakistan, and Thailand ranged from 26 to
45 percent; for stages I and II, the survival rates ranged
from 36 to 83 percent. The inferior survival rates in
LMICs versus HICs reflect disparities in the availability, accessibility, and affordability of diagnostic and
treatment services (Sankaranarayanan and others 2010;
Sankaranarayanan and Swaminathan 2011).

ECONOMICS OF PREVENTING AND
SCREENING FOR ORAL CANCERS IN LMICS
Cost-Effectiveness Assessments
Only a few cost-effectiveness studies of oral cancer
screening focus on LMICs; therefore, we include a
broader range of studies, including some from HICs.
Although these studies may not be directly relevant to
resource-limited settings, they provide valuable insights
into the potential cost-effectiveness of interventions.

Primary Prevention
Interventions targeted at reducing or eliminating tobacco
and alcohol use should be considered for implementation
when shown to be cost-effective. All the interventions
presented are cost-effective, even for LMICs. In the case
of tobacco cessation, increasing the price of tobacco products is the most cost-effective approach, with incremental
cost-effectiveness ratios ranging from US$4 to US$34
per disability-adjusted life year. Alcohol control interventions tend to have higher cost-effectiveness ratios;
advertising bans and reduced access range from US$367
to US$1,307; combination strategies (including price
increases, reduced access, and advertisement bans) range
from US$601 to US$1,704. (Interventions to decrease
tobacco use are covered in more detail in chapter 10.)
Screening
Table 5.4 summarizes findings from the relevant costeffectiveness studies. Among the four studies of the
cost-effectiveness of oral cancer screening, three—all set
in HICs—used decision analytic modeling; the other,
the only one from a resource-constrained environment,
used data from a randomized clinical trial in India. Only
the Indian study (Subramanian and others 2009) directly

reflects the costs and effectiveness likely to be experienced in LMICs. In general, screening was at ages 35 or
40 years and older; three of the four studies included
both high-risk and average-risk individuals. All of the
studies presented incremental cost-effectiveness, compared with the scenario of no screening. A variety of
interventions was assessed, using invitation and opportunistic screening; visual inspection was performed by
specialists (oral cancer surgeons), dentists, or trained
health care workers.
The results indicate that screening is cost-effective
even in LMICs. The study from India provides evidence
that oral cancer screening by visual inspection costs less
than US$6 per person in a screening program; this has
an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of US$835 per
life year saved. The most cost-effective and affordable
option in the limited-resource setting is to offer oral
cancer screening to high-risk individuals, for example, tobacco and alcohol users. The incremental costeffectiveness ratio for screening high-risk individuals
in southern India is US$156 per life year saved. There
is wide variation in the incremental cost-effectiveness
reported across the studies, probably because of factors
such as the underlying prevalence of disease and the

Table 5.4 Oral Cancer Screening Cost-Effectiveness Studies
Methodology/
cost data

Interventions/tests
compared

Cost-effectiveness
assessment

Individuals with OLP

Decision analytic model:
all relevant clinical
costs

Screening by oral
specialist or dentist
versus no screening

US$53,430 per ELS or
US$2,137 per QALY for
screening by specialist,
compared with no
screening: lower costeffectiveness ratio for
screening by dentists

United Kingdom

Screening programs
for individuals ages
40 years and older in
primary care settings

Decision analytic model:
all relevant invitation
and clinical costs

No screening compared
with invitation and
opportunistic screening

Opportunistic screening
of high-risk individuals
ages 40–60 years
most cost-effective:
US$19,000 per QALY

Subramanian
and others
2009

India

13 clusters randomized
in Kerala; those ages
35 years or older were
eligible for the study

Cost-effectiveness
assessment, including
program and clinical
costs

Visual inspection by
trained health care
workers compared with
usual care

US$835 per LYS for all
individuals; US$156
per LYS for high-risk
individuals

Dedhia and
others 2011

United States

Community-based
screening for high-risk
men (ages 40 years or
older, tobacco and/or
alcohol users)

Markov model: clinical
costs included but no
program costs

Oral exam (visual
inspection and manual
palpation) by trained
health care workers,
compared with no
screening

A budget of US$3,363
per person over
a 40-year cycle
for screening is
cost-effective

Study

Country

Setting/population

Van Der Meij,
Bezemer, and
Van Der Waal
2002

Netherlands

Speight and
others 2006

Note: ELS = equivalent life saved; LYS = life year saved; OLP = oral lichen planus; QALY = quality-adjusted life year.

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

95

local cost of cancer treatment. The cost of care related
to screening, diagnosis, and treatment can differ substantially, even among countries classified as LMICs.
Accordingly, it is essential to systematically assess costs
at the country or even local level to analyze the costeffectiveness and resources required to implement oral
cancer screening.
Future Research Needs
Primary prevention, especially smoking cessation, and
secondary prevention, focused on high-risk individuals, are likely to be cost-effective and affordable in
LMICs. Additional studies are required to assess the costeffectiveness and budget implications of visual screening
for oral cancers in LMICs. These studies should focus
on the screening delivery structure to identify the most
cost-effective approach to provide oral cancer screening
to high-risk individuals.
When cancer screening policies are implemented,
the success of the program will depend on participation by the target population. Even when screening and
follow-up care are free of charge, patients may not be
able to afford to lose a day’s wages to attend screening
clinics or travel to health centers to receive follow-up
diagnostic testing or treatments. The indirect costs
borne by the patients may be particularly challenging
among those in the lower socioeconomic strata. These
are the very individuals likely to be at higher risk for
developing oral cancers; it is, therefore, vital that identifying approaches to encourage and sustain participation
among this potentially hard-to-reach, high-risk population be given high priority.

CONCLUSION
A multifaceted approach that integrates health education, tobacco and alcohol control, early detection, and
early treatment is needed to reduce the burden of this
eminently preventable cancer. How to accomplish this
is known; astonishingly, it has not been applied in most
countries, and not at all in the high-burden countries.
Improving awareness among the general public and
primary care practitioners, investing in health services
to provide screening and early diagnosis services for
tobacco and alcohol users, and providing adequate treatment for those diagnosed with invasive cancer are critically important oral cancer control measures. Imaging,
histopathology, cancer surgery and radiotherapy infrastructure and services, trained professionals, and the
availability of chemotherapeutic agents are inadequate
in many LMICs, seriously compromising early detection

96

Cancer

and optimum treatment. As this chapter has demonstrated, however, these interventions are affordable and
cost-effective.

NOTES
The World Bank classifies countries according to four income
groupings. Income is measured using gross national income
per capita, in U.S. dollars, converted from local currency using
the World Bank Atlas method. Classifications as of July 2014
are as follows:
•
•

•

Low-income countries = US$1,045 or less in 2013
Middle-income countries are subdivided:
• Lower-middle-income = US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income = US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries = US$12,746 or more
1. Maps and figures in this chapter are based on incidence
and mortality estimates for ages 0–69, consistent with
reporting in all DCP3 volumes. Global cancer statistics
are estimates for the year 2012 and have been provided by
the International Agency for Research on Cancer from its
GLOBOCAN 2012 database. Observable population-based
data were derived from Cancer Incidence in Five Continents,
10th edition and for trends over time from CI5 Plus (http://
ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx). The discussion of burden
(including risk factors), however, includes all ages unless
otherwise noted. Interventions also apply to all age groups,
except where age ranges or cutoffs are specified.

REFERENCES
Amagasa T., M. Yamashiro, and N. Uzawa. 2011. “Oral
Premalignant Lesions: From a Clinical Perspective.”
International Journal of Clinical Oncology 16 (1): 5–14.
Amarasinghe, H. K., N. W. Johnson, R. Lalloo, M. Kumaraarachchi,
and S. Warnakulasuriya. 2010. “Derivation and Validation
of a Risk-Factor Model for Detection of Oral Potentially
Malignant Disorders in Populations with High Prevalence.”
British Journal of Cancer 103 (3): 303–09.
Bernier J., C. Domenge, M. Ozsahin, K. Matuszewska,
J. L. Lefebvre, and others. 2004. “Postoperative Irradiation
with or Without Concomitant Chemotherapy for Locally
Advanced Head and Neck Cancer.” New England Journal of
Medicine 350 (19): 1945–52.
Bhurgri Y., A. Bhurgri, A. Usman, S. Pervez, N. Kayani,
and others. 2006. “Epidemiological Review of Head and
Neck Cancers in Karachi.” Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer
Prevention 7 (2): 195–200.
Blanchard P., B. Baujat, V. Holostenco, A. Bourredjem, C. Baey,
and others. 2011. “Meta-Analysis of Chemotherapy in
Head and Neck Cancer (MACH-NC): A Comprehensive
Analysis by Tumour Site.” Radiotherapy and Oncology
100 (1): 33–40.

Bonifazi M., M. Malvezzi, P. Bertuccio, V. Edefonti, W. Garavello,
and others. 2011. “Age-Period-Cohort Analysis of Oral
Cancer Mortality in Europe: The End of an Epidemic?”
Oral Oncology 47 (5): 400–07.
Bray, F., J. S. Ren, E. Masuyer, and J. Ferlay. 2013. “Estimates
of Global Cancer Prevalence for 27 Sites in the Adult
Population in 2008.” International Journal of Cancer
132 (5): 1133–45.
Brocklehurst, P., O. Kujan, L. A. O’Malley, G. Ogden, S. Shepherd,
and A. M Glenny. 2013. “Screening Programmes for the
Early Detection and Prevention of Oral Cancer.” Cochrane
Database of Systematic Reviews 11: CD004150.
Brown L. M., D. P. Check, and S. S. Devesa. 2011. “Oropharyngeal
Cancer Incidence Trends: Diminishing Racial Disparities.”
Cancer Causes and Control 22 (5): 753–63.
Chainani-Wu, N., J. Epstein, and R. Touger-Decker. 2011.
“Diet and Prevention of Oral Cancer: Strategies for Clinical
Practice.” Journal of the American Dental Association
142 (2): 166–69.
Cooper, J. S., T. F. Pajak, A. A. Forastiere, J. Jacobs, B. H. Campbell,
and others. 2004. “Postoperative Concurrent Radiotherapy
and Chemotherapy for High-Risk Squamous-Cell
Carcinoma of the Head and Neck.” New England Journal of
Medicine 350 (19): 1937–44.
Dedhia, R. C., K. J. Smith, J. T. Johnson, and M. Roberts. 2011.
“The Cost-Effectiveness of Community-Based Screening
for Oral Cancer in High-Risk Males in the United States:
A Markov Decision Analysis Approach.” Laryngoscope
121 (5): 952–60.
Deneo-Pellegrini, H., E. De Stefani, P. Boffetta, A. L. Ronco,
G. Acosta, and others. 2012. “Mate Consumption and Risk
of Oral Cancer: Case-Control Study in Uruguay.” Head &
Neck 35 (8): 1091–95.
Downer, M. C., D. R. Moles, S. Palmer, and P. M. Speight.
2004. “A Systematic Review of Test Performance in
Screening for Oral Cancer and Precancer.” Oral Oncology
40 (3): 264–73.
Edwards, C. P. 2013. “Oral Cancer Screening for Asymptomatic
Adults: Do the United States Preventive Services Task Force
Draft Guidelines Miss the Proverbial Forest for the Trees?”
Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology and Oral
Radiology 116 (2): 131–34.
Elango, K. J., N. Anandkrishnan, A. Suresh, S. K. Iyer,
S. K. Ramaiyer, and others. 2011. “Mouth Self-Examination
to Improve Oral Cancer Awareness and Early Detection in a
High-Risk Population.” Oral Oncology 47 (7): 620–24.
El-Naaj, I. A., Y. Leiser, M. Shveis, E. Sabo, and M. Peled. 2011.
“Incidence of Oral Cancer Occult Metastasis and Survival
of T1-T2N0 Oral Cancer Patients.” Journal of Oral &
Maxillofacial Surgery 69 (10): 2674–79.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, and
others. 2013. GLOBOCAN 2012 V1.0, Cancer Incidence and
Mortality Worldwide: IARC Cancerbase No. 11 [Internet].
Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer.
http://globocan.iarc.fr.
Fernandez, G. L., R. Sankaranarayanan, J. J. Lence Anta,
S. A. Rodriguez, and D. M. Parkin. 1995. “An Evaluation of

the Oral Cancer Control Program in Cuba.” Epidemiology
6 (4): 428–31.
Forman, D., F. Bray, D. H. Brewster, C. Gombe Mbalawa,
B. Kohler, and others. 2013. Cancer Incidence in Five
Continents. Vol. 10 (Electronic Version). Lyon, France:
International Agency for Cancer. http://ci5.iarc.fr.
Fujita, M., Y. Hirokawa, K. Kashiwado, Y. Akagi, K. Kashimoto,
and others. 1999. “Interstitial Brachytherapy for Stage I and
II Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Oral Tongue: Factors
Influencing Local Control and Soft Tissue Complications.”
International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics
44 (4): 767–75.
Gandini, S., E. Negri, P. Boffetta, V. C. La, and P. Boyle. 2012.
“Mouthwash and Oral Cancer Risk Quantitative MetaAnalysis of Epidemiologic Studies.” Annals of Agricultural
and Environmental Medicine 19 (2): 173–80.
Gupta, B., A. Ariyawardana, and N. W. Johnson. 2013. “Oral
Cancer in India Continues in Epidemic Proportions:
Evidence Base and Policy Initiatives.” International Dental
Journal 63 (1): 12–25.
Gupta, P. C., C. S. Ray, D. N. Sinha, and P. K. Singh. 2011.
“Smokeless Tobacco: A Major Public Health Problem in
the SEA Region: A Review.” Indian Journal of Public Health
55 (3): 199–209.
Harty, L. C., N. E. Caporaso, R. B. Hayes, D. M. Winn,
E. Bravo-Otero, and others. 1997. “Alcohol Dehydrogenase 3
Genotype and Risk of Oral Cavity and Pharyngeal Cancers.”
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 89 (22): 1698–705.
Heck, J. E., J. Berthiller, S. Vaccarella, D. M. Winn, E. M. Smith,
and others. 2010. “Sexual Behaviours and the Risk of Head
and Neck Cancers: A Pooled Analysis in the International
Head and Neck Cancer Epidemiology (INHANCE)
Consortium.” International Journal of Epidemiology 39 (1):
166–81.
Hicks, W. L., Jr., T. R. Loree, R. I. Garcia, S. Maamoun,
D. Marshall, and others. 1997. “Squamous Cell Carcinoma
of the Floor of Mouth: A 20-Year Review.” Head & Neck
19 (5): 400–05.
Hirsch, J. M., M. Wallstrom, A. P. Carlsson, and L. Sand.
2012. “Oral Cancer in Swedish Snuff Dippers.” Anticancer
Research 32 (8): 3327–30.
Howlader, N., L. A. Ries, A. B. Mariotto, M. E. Reichman,
J. Ruhl, and others. 2010. “Improved Estimates of CancerSpecific Survival Rates from Population-Based Data.”
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 102 (20): 1584–98.
Hsue, S. S., W. C. Wang, C. H. Chen, C. C. Lin, Y. K. Chen,
and L. M. Lin. 2007. “Malignant Transformation in 1458
Patients with Potentially Malignant Oral Mucosal Disorders:
A Follow-Up Study Based in a Taiwanese Hospital.” Journal
of Oral Pathology & Medicine 36 (1): 25–29.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2004a.
IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks
to Humans, Volume 83: Tobacco Smoke and Involuntary
Smoking. Lyon, France: IARC.
———. 2004b. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 85: Betel-Quid and
Areca-Nut Derived Nitrosamines. Lyon, France: IARC.

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

97

———. 2007. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 89: Smokeless Tobacco
and Some Tobacco-Specific N-Nitrosamines. Lyon, France:
IARC.
———. 2010. IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of
Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 96: Alcohol
Consumption and Ethyl Carbamate. Lyon, France: IARC.
Javed, F., M. Chotai, A. Mehmood, and K. Almas. 2010. “Oral
Mucosal Disorders Associated with Habitual Gutka Usage:
A Review.” Oral Surgery, Oral Medicine, Oral Pathology, Oral
Radiology, and Endodontics 109 (6): 857–64.
Johnson, N. W., S. Warnakulasuriya, P. C. Gupta, E. Dimba,
M. Chindia, and others. 2011. “Global Oral Health
Inequalities in Incidence and Outcomes for Oral Cancer:
Causes and Solutions.” Advances in Dental Research 23 (2):
237–46.
Lambert, R., C. Sauvaget, C. M. De Camargo, and
R. Sankaranarayanan. 2011. “Epidemiology of Cancer from
the Oral Cavity and Oropharynx.” European Journal of
Gastroenterology & Hepatology 23 (8): 633–41.
Licitra L., C. Grandi, M. Guzzo, L. Mariani, V. S. Lo, and others.
2003. “Primary Chemotherapy in Resectable Oral Cavity
Squamous Cell Cancer: A Randomized Controlled Trial.”
Journal of Clinical Oncology 21 (2): 327–33.
Lu, D., X. Yu, and Y. Du. 2011. “Meta-Analyses of the Effect of
Cytochrome P450 2E1 Gene Polymorphism on the Risk of
Head and Neck Cancer.” Molecular Biology Reports 38 (4):
2409–16.
Lucenteforte, E., W. Garavello, C. Bosetti, and V. C. La.
2009.”Dietary Factors and Oral and Pharyngeal Cancer
Risk.” Oral Oncology 45 (6): 461–67.
Lundahl, R. E., R. L. Foote, J. A. Bonner, V. J. Suman, J. E. Lewis,
and others. 1998. “Combined Neck Dissection and
Postoperative Radiation Therapy in the Management of the
High-Risk Neck: A Matched-Pair Analysis.” International
Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics 40 (3):
529–34.
Marsiglia, H., C. Haie-Meder, G. Sasso, G. Mamelle, and
A. Gerbaulet. 2002. “Brachytherapy for T1-T2 Floor-of-theMouth Cancers: The Gustave-Roussy Institute Experience.”
International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics
52 (5): 1257–63.
Mathew, B., R. Sankaranarayanan, K. B. Sunilkumar,
B. Kuruvila, P. Pisani, and others. 1997. “Reproducibility
and Validity of Oral Visual Inspection by Trained Health
Workers in the Detection of Oral Precancer and Cancer.”
British Journal of Cancer 76 (3): 390–94.
Mathew, B., R. Sankaranarayanan, R. Wesley, and M. K. Nair.
1995. “Evaluation of Mouth Self-Examination in the
Control of Oral Cancer.” British Journal of Cancer 71 (2):
397–99.
Mehta, F. S., P. C. Gupta, R. B. Bhonsle, P. R. Murti, D. K. Daftary,
and J. J. Pindborg. 1986. “Detection of Oral Cancer Using
Basic Health Workers in an Area of High Oral Cancer
Incidence in India.” Cancer Detection and Prevention
9 (3–4): 219–25.
Napier, S. S., and P. M. Speight. 2008. “Natural History of
Potentially Malignant Oral Lesions and Conditions: An

98

Cancer

Overview of the Literature.” Journal of Oral Pathology &
Medicine 37 (1): 1–10.
Patel, S. G., and J. P. Shah. 2005. “TNM Staging of Cancers
of the Head and Neck: Striving for Uniformity among
Diversity.” CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 55 (4):
242–58.
Patton, L. L., J. B. Epstein, and A. R. Kerr. 2008. “Adjunctive
Techniques for Oral Cancer Examination and Lesion
Diagnosis: A Systematic Review of the Literature.” Journal
of the American Dental Association 139 (7): 896–905.
Pavia, M., C. Pileggi, C. G. Nobile, and I. F. Angelillo. 2006.
“Association between Fruit and Vegetable Consumption
and Oral Cancer: A Meta-Analysis of Observational
Studies.” American Journal of Clinical Nutrition 83 (5):
1126–34.
Piemonte, E. D., J. P. Lazos, and M. Brunotto. 2010. “Relationship
between Chronic Trauma of the Oral Mucosa, Oral
Potentially Malignant Disorders and Oral Cancer.” Journal
of Oral Pathology & Medicine 39 (7): 513–17.
Prabhu, S., and D. Wilson. 2013. “Human Papillomavirus and
Oral Disease: Emerging Evidence: A Review.” Australian
Dental Journal 58 (1): 2–10.
Pulte, D., and H. Brenner. 2010. “Changes in Survival in Head
and Neck Cancers in the Late 20th and Early 21st Century:
A Period Analysis.” Oncologist 15 (9): 994–1001.
Radoi, L., S. Paget-Bailly, D. Cyr, A. Papadopoulos, F. Guida,
and others. 2013. “Tobacco Smoking, Alcohol Drinking
and Risk of Oral Cavity Cancer by Subsite: Results of a
French Population-Based Case-Control Study, the ICARE
Study.” European Journal of Cancer Prevention 22 (3):
268–76.
Ramadas, K., E. Lucas, G. Thomas, B. Mathew, A. Balan, and
others. 2008. A Digital Manual for the Early Diagnosis of
Oral Neoplasia. Lyon, France: International Agency for
Research on Cancer. http://screening.iarc.fr/atlasoral
.php.
Rethman, M. P., W. Carpenter, E. E. Cohen, J. Epstein,
C. A. Evans, and others. 2010. “Evidence-Based Clinical
Recommendations Regarding Screening for Oral Squamous
Cell Carcinomas.” Journal of the American Dental Association
141 (5): 509–20.
Richards, D. 2010. “Does Toluidine Blue Detect More Oral
Cancer?” Evidence-Based Dental Practice 11 (4): 104–05.
Ries, L. A. G., D. Melbert, M. Krapcho, D. G. Stinchcomb,
N. Howlader, and others. 2008. Cancer Statistics Review,
1975–2005. Bethesda, MD: National Cancer Institute.
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975-2005.
Saba, N. F., M. Goodman, K. Ward, C. Flowers, S. Ramalingam,
and others. 2011. “Gender and Ethnic Disparities in
Incidence and Survival of Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the
Oral Tongue, Base of Tongue, and Tonsils: A Surveillance,
Epidemiology and End Results Program-Based Analysis.”
Oncology 81 (1): 12–20.
Sankaranarayanan, R., K. Ramadas, S. Thara, R. Muwonge,
G. Thomas, and others. 2013. “Long Term Effect of Visual
Screening on Oral Cancer Incidence and Mortality in a
Randomized Trial in Kerala, India.” Oral Oncology 49 (4):
314–21.

Sankaranarayanan, R., K. Ramadas, G. Thomas, R. Muwonge,
S. Thara, and others. 2005. “Effect of Screening on Oral
Cancer Mortality in Kerala, India: A Cluster-Randomised
Controlled Trial.” The Lancet 365 (9475): 1927–33.
Sankaranarayanan, R., and R. Swaminathan. 2011. Cancer
Survival in Africa, Asia, the Caribbean and Central America.
Scientific Publications No. 162. Lyon, France: International
Agency for Research on Cancer.
Sankaranarayanan, R., R. Swaminathan, H. Brenner, K. Chen,
K. S. Chia, and others. 2010. “Cancer Survival in Africa,
Asia, and Central America: A Population-Based Study.” The
Lancet Oncology 11 (2): 165–73.
Sant, M., C. Allemani, M. Santaquilani, A. Knijn, F. Marchesi,
and others. 2009. “EUROCARE-4. Survival of Cancer
Patients Diagnosed in 1995–1999.Results and Commentary.”
European Journal of Cancer 45 (6): 931–91.
Satyanarayana, L., and S. Asthana. 2008. “Life Time Risk for
Development of Ten Major Cancers in India and Its Trends
over the Years 1982 to 2000.” Indian Journal of Medical
Sciences 62 (2): 35–44.
Scott, S. E., K. Rizvi, E. A. Grunfeld, and M. Mcgurk. 2010. “Pilot
Study to Estimate the Accuracy of Mouth Self-Examination
in an At-Risk Group.” Head & Neck 32 (10): 1393–401.
Sinha, D. N., K. M. Palipudi, I. Rolle, S. Asma, and
S. Rinchen. 2011. “Tobacco Use among Youth and Adults
in Member Countries of South-East Asia Region: Review
of Findings from Surveys under the Global Tobacco
Surveillance System.” Indian Journal of Public Health 55 (3):
169–76.
Sobin, L. H., and C. Wittekind. 2002. UICC TNM Classification
of Malignant Tumours. Geneva: Union for International
Cancer Control.
Somatunga, L. C., D. N. Sinha, P. Sumanasekera, K. Galapatti,
S. Rinchen, and others. 2012. “Smokeless Tobacco Use in
Sri Lanka.” Indian Journal of Cancer 49 (4): 357–63.
Speight, P. M., S. Palmer, D. R. Moles, M. C. Downer,
D. H. Smith, and others. 2006. “The Cost-Effectiveness
of Screening for Oral Cancer in Primary Care.” Health
Technology Assessment 10 (14):1–144, Iii-Iv.
Su, W. W., A. M. Yen, S. Y. Chiu, and T. H. Chen. 2010.
“A Community-Based RCT for Oral Cancer Screening with
Toluidine Blue.” Journal of Dental Research 89 (9): 933–37.
Subramanian, S., R. Sankaranarayanan, B. Bapat, T. Somanathan,
G. Thomas, and others. 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness of Oral
Cancer Screening: Results from a Cluster Randomized
Controlled Trial in India.” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 87 (3): 200–06.
Tseng, C. H. 2013. “Oral Cancer in Taiwan: Is Diabetes a Risk
Factor?” Clinical Oral Investigations 17 (5): 1357–64.
Van Der Meij, E. H., P. D. Bezemer, and I. Van Der Waal.
2002. “Cost-Effectiveness of Screening for the Possible

Development of Cancer in Patients with Oral Lichen
Planus.” Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology
30 (5): 342–51.
Vijayakumar, M., R. Burrah, K. S. Sabitha, H. Nadimul, and
B. C. Rajani. 2011. “To Operate or Not to Operate: N0 Neck
in Early Cancer of the Tongue? A Prospective Study.” Indian
Journal of Surgical Oncology 2 (3): 172–75.
Walsh, T, J. L. Liu, P. Brocklehurst, A. M. Glenny, M. Lingen, and
others. 2013. “Clinical Assessment to Screen for Oral Cavity
Cancer and Potentially Malignant Disorders in Apparently
Healthy Adults.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews
11: CD010173.
Warnakulasuriya, K. A., A. N. Ekanayake, S. Sivayoham,
J. Stjernsward, J. J. Pindborg, and others. 1984. “Utilization
of Primary Health Care Workers for Early Detection of Oral
Cancer and Precancer Cases in Sri Lanka.” Bulletin of the
World Health Organization 62 (2): 243–50.
Warnakulasuriya, S., N. W. Johnson, and I. Van Der Waal. 2007.
“Nomenclature and Classification of Potentially Malignant
Disorders of the Oral Mucosa.” Journal of Oral Pathology &
Medicine 36 (10): 575–80.
Warnakulasuriya, K. A., and B. G. Nanayakkara. 1991.
“Reproducibility of an Oral Cancer and Precancer Detection
Program Using a Primary Health Care Model in Sri Lanka.”
Cancer Detection and Prevention 15 (5): 331–34.
Wendt, C. D., L. J. Peters, L. Delclos, K. K. Ang, W. H. Morrison,
and others. 1990. “Primary Radiotherapy in the Treatment
of Stage I and II Oral Tongue Cancers: Importance of the
Proportion of Therapy Delivered with Interstitial Therapy.”
International Journal of Radiation Oncology Biology Physics
18 (6): 1287–92.
Woolgar, J. A. 2006. “Histopathological Prognosticators in
Oral and Oropharyngeal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.” Oral
Oncology 42 (3): 229–39.
World Cancer Research Fund and AICR (American Institute
for Cancer Research). 2007. Food, Nutrition, Physical
Activity, and the Prevention of Cancer: A Global Perspective.
Washington, DC: AICR.
Wrangle, J. M., and F. R. Khuri. 2007. “Chemoprevention of
Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Neck.” Current
Opinion in Oncology 19 (3): 180–87.
Yako-Suketomo, H., and T. Matsuda. 2010. “Comparison
of Time Trends in Lip, Oral Cavity and Pharynx Cancer
Mortality (1990–2006) between Countries Based on the
WHO Mortality Database.” Japanese Journal of Clinical
Oncology 40 (11): 1118–19.
Zwetyenga, N., C. Majoufre-Lefebvre, F. Siberchicot,
H. Demeaux, and J. Pinsolle. 2003. “[Squamous-cell
carcinoma of the tongue: treatment results and prognosis].”
Revue de stomatologie et de chirurgie maxillo-faciale 104 (1):
10–17.

Oral Cancer: Prevention, Early Detection, and Treatment

99

Chapter

6

Colorectal Cancer
Linda Rabeneck, Susan Horton, Ann G. Zauber, and Craig Earle

INTRODUCTION
Adenocarcinoma of the colon and rectum (colorectal
cancer, CRC) is the third most common cancer, the
fourth most common cause of cancer death, and the
second most common cancer in terms of the number of
individuals living with cancer five years after diagnosis
worldwide. An estimated 1,361,000 people are diagnosed
with CRC annually; approximately 694,000 people die
from CRC annually; and 3,544,000 individuals are living
with CRC (Ferlay and others 2013).
Randomized controlled trials (RCT) have shown
that screening is associated with a reduction in CRC
mortality; in several high-income countries (HICs),
organized, population-based screening programs have
been introduced, starting in 2006. Some screening tests
detect cancer at an early stage when treatment is less
arduous and more often results in cure. Other screening
tests have the ability to detect adenomas as well as cancer.
Screening provides the opportunity to identify and
remove adenomas and thereby to prevent the development of the disease (Lieberman and others 2012).
In general, the burden of disease, as measured
by incidence and mortality rates, tracks the World
Bank grouping of countries into low-, lower-middle,
upper-middle, and high-income: the lowest-income
countries have the lowest burden of disease. The ability
to intervene to introduce screening and offer access to
high-quality treatment is a function of resource availability, which is associated with income level. The ability

of countries to develop interventions increases with
income, suggesting a progression in policy options as
country income increases.
The focus of this chapter is on those who are at average risk for CRC. In our discussion of policy options,
we use a slightly different typology than income for
resource availability, following chapter 3 in this volume
(Anderson and others 2015). The resources available
at a health facility can be described as basic, limited,
enhanced, and maximal. The basic level corresponds
approximately to the situation in low-income countries
(LICs), the limited level to the situation in rural areas
of lower-middle-income countries and upper-middleincome countries, the enhanced level to the situation in
urban areas of lower-middle-income and upper-middleincome countries, and the maximal level to the situation
in HICs. We provide suggestions for appropriate screening and treatment strategies that correspond to these
resource levels for policy makers to consider.

BURDEN AND EPIDEMIOLOGY1
CRC is the third most common cancer in men (746,000
cases, 10.0 percent of all cancers in men worldwide); it
is the second most common cancer in women (614,000
cases, 9.2 percent of all cancers in women worldwide).
CRC incidence rates vary approximately tenfold in
both genders worldwide and are higher in men than
in women; the overall sex ratio of the age-standardized

Corresponding author: Linda Rabeneck, MD, MPH, FRCPC, Cancer Care Ontario and University of Toronto, linda.rabeneck@cancercare.on.ca.

101

rates is 1.44:1 (Ferlay and others 2013). CRC incidence
and mortality rates vary widely across regions, with
mortality highest among men in HICs (map 6.1).
The distribution of incidence in men and women and
mortality in women may be seen in online annex 6A
(maps 6A.1, 6A.2, and 6A.3). Approximately 55 percent
of persons diagnosed with CRC are in HICs. Australia,
Canada, New Zealand, the United States, and Western
Europe have the highest estimated incidence rates,
while incidence rates are intermediate in Latin America
and the Caribbean. The lowest rates are in Sub-Saharan
Africa, with the exception of southern Africa, and
South Asia.
CRC mortality rates are lower in women than in
men. However, compared with incidence rates, variability in mortality rates worldwide is less (sixfold in men,
fourfold in women). Estimated CRC mortality rates are
highest in Eastern and Central Europe (20.3 per 100,000
for men and 11.7 per 100,000 for women); Western
Africa has the lowest estimated mortality rates (3.5 and
3.0, respectively).
Temporal Trends in Incidence and Mortality
Temporal trends in CRC incidence and mortality in a
population reflect changes in the prevalence of risk factors in the population, coupled with changes associated
Map 6.1 Global Colorectal Cancer Mortality in Men, 2012

Source: Based on data from Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: ASR = Age-Standardized Rate.

102

Cancer

with the introduction of screening. CRC incidence rates
have stabilized or are declining in many HICs. Initially,
the stabilization or decline may have been caused by
declines in some risks, such as smoking; more recently,
the change is likely to be caused by increased screening.
Data from the Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) Program for the state of Connecticut,
United States, from 1940 to 2009, is one of the longest consistent time-series available. Incidence rates
increased rapidly until the 1980s and then declined.
(See online annex 6A, figure 6A.1). The peak in the
1980s represents the introduction of screening (primarily with fecal occult blood tests) and is consistent with
an initial increase in incidence with screening because
of detection of early-stage and preclinical disease. The
decline post-1985 likely represents the impact of screening, as well as a decrease in risk factors such as smoking.
The inverted U-shaped curve is more pronounced for
men than for women (figure 6A.1). CRC incidence rates
are now declining to the lowest level since the 1940s
(Edwards and others 2010).
Trends for the United States as a whole are similar to
those for Connecticut, but data are not available as far
back as 1940 in a continuous series. A declining trend
in CRC mortality is also seen in other HICs, including
Australia, Denmark, and Japan. Incidence has not yet
begun to decline in these three countries, likely because

a “bulge” in reported cases occurs as CRC is detected at
increasingly earlier stages. One would eventually expect
to see incidence rates decline as in the United States,
once a steady state is reached in screening.
The increase in CRC incidence and mortality in
middle-income countries (MICs), such as Brazil, China,
the Philippines, and Thailand (figures 6.1 and 6.2), is
occurring prior to the onset of organized screening. Even
in lower-middle-income countries such as India, incidence

rates are increasing. Data from LICs are sparse, because of
the limited availability and coverage of cancer registries.
Incidence and Mortality by Income Group
We classified the age-adjusted incidence and mortality
rates for CRC by World Bank groupings of countries into
LICs, lower-middle-income countries, upper-middleincome countries, and HICs (figure 6.3). The CRC

Figure 6.1 Trends in Age-Standardized Incidence and Mortality Rates of Colorectal Cancer in Men, Selected Countries, 1980–2010
b. High- and upper-middle-income

30

30

20

20
Age-standardized rate (world) per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized rate (world) per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and lower-middle-income

15

10

7

5

15

10

7

5

3

3

2

2
1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Calendar year

Indiaa

Thailand
Philippines

2000

2010

Calendar year
Incidence

Philippines

1990

Uganda

Mortality
United States: Blacka

United States: Black

United States: Whitea
Chinaa

United States: White
China

Spaina

Spain

Brazila

Brazil

Source: CI5 Plus (http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx) and WHO Mortality Database (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/mortality_rawdata/en/index.html).
Note: Mortality data are not available for all economies shown. Incidence estimated from selected population-based cancer registries of consistently high quality (included in successive volumes of
Cancer Incidence in Five Continents). Incidence data for the economies in the graphs are for Brazil (Goiania), China (Hong Kong SAR and Shanghai), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Philippines (Manila),
Spain (Granada, Murcia, Navarra, and Tarragona), Thailand (Chiang Mai), Uganda (Kampala), United States (SEER).
a. Denotes rates based on an aggregate of one or more regional registries, as indicated.

Colorectal Cancer

103

Figure 6.2 Trends in Age-Standardized Incidence and Mortality of Colorectal Cancer Rates in Women, Selected Countries, 1980–2010

b. High- and upper-middle-income

25

25

20

20

15

15

Age-standardized rate (world) per 100,000, 0–69 years

Age-standardized rate (world) per 100,000, 0–69 years

a. Low- and lower-middle-income

10

7

5

3

10

7

5

3

2

2

1.5

1.5

1980

1990

2000

2010

1980

Calendar year

Ugandaa

Thailanda

2000

2010

Calendar year
Incidence

Philippinesa

1990

Indiaa

Philippines

Mortality
United States: Blacka

United States: Black

United States: Whitea
Chinaa

United States: White
China

Spaina

Spain

Brazila

Brazil

Source: CI5 Plus (http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx) and WHO Mortality Database (http://www.who.int/healthinfo/statistics/mortality_rawdata/en/index.html).
Note: Mortality data are not available for all economies shown. Incidence estimated from selected population-based cancer registries of consistently high quality (included in successive volumes of
Cancer Incidence in Five Continents). Incidence data for the economies in the graphs are for Brazil (Goiania), China (Hong Kong SAR and Shanghai), India (Chennai and Mumbai), Philippines (Manila),
Spain (Granada, Murcia, Navarra, and Tarragona), Thailand (Chiang Mai), Uganda (Kampala), United States (SEER).
a. Denotes rates based on an aggregate of one or more regional registries, as indicated.

incidence and mortality rates increase with increasing
country income, as indicated by the World Bank income
groupings.
We derived the mortality-to-incidence ratio as an
approximation of the CRC-specific mortality rate using
the data from figure 6.3. The mortality-to-incidence
ratio roughly represents the percentage of people with
CRC who die of this disease. Although the low-income

104

Cancer

countries had the lowest CRC incidence and mortality
rates, approximately 67 percent of men and 68 percent
of women who develop CRC die from the disease. This
is in strong contrast to the experience in HICs, where
the incidence and mortality rates are much higher, but
only approximately 31 percent of men and 30 percent
of women with CRC die of this cancer. The corresponding figures for lower-middle-income countries

are 60 percent of men and 58 percent of women; for
upper-middle-income countries, they are 49 percent of
men and 47 percent of women. These results indicate that
better survival is associated with higher country income.
For China, the mortality-to-incidence ratio is 37 percent
for men and 36 percent for women who develop CRC,
whereas for India, the mortality-to-incidence ratio is 70
percent for men and 68 percent for women, indicating a
very high case fatality rate from CRC in India.
In summary, the current burden of disease parallels
the World Bank income groupings, with the lowestincome countries having the lowest burden of disease
and poorest disease-specific survival.
Risk Factors
Age, sex, and family history are independent risk factors
for CRC. The incidence of CRC increases with age, with
approximately 7 percent of cases occurring in those
younger than 50 years. The risk is somewhat higher
among men than women. About 75 percent of new cases
of CRC occur in those with no known predisposing factors. Those at increased risk because of a family history
of CRC but without an identifiable genetic syndrome
account for 15–20 percent of cases. HNPCC (Lynch
syndrome) accounts for about 5 percent of cases, and
familial adenomatous polyposis (FAP) accounts for
about 1 percent (Winawer and others 1997). HNPCC
and FAP are genetic polyposis syndromes. Those with
a family history of CRC in a parent, sibling, or child are
at a twofold increased risk of the disease (Butterworth,
Higgins, and Pharoah 2006; Johnson and others 2013).
In terms of modifiable risk factors, epidemiological
evidence supports roles for diet, lifestyle, and medications (Chan and Giovannucci 2010). In general, diets
high in red meat are associated with an increased risk.
For red meat, a recent meta-analysis reported a relative
risk of 1.13 for consumption of five versus no servings per week (Johnson and others 2013). In addition,
smoking, obesity, and a sedentary lifestyle are associated with an increased risk. For smoking, a relative
risk of 1.26 for a 30-pack per year smoker versus a
non-smoker, and for obesity, a relative risk of 1.10 for
body mass index greater than 30 versus 22 kg/m2 were
recently reported (Johnson and others 2013). Calcium
supplements may be associated with a modest reduction
in risk. Aspirin and nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs and postmenopausal hormone therapy among
women are inversely associated with CRC risk, although
the magnitudes of these effects are uncertain. The rise
in CRC incidence rates in low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs) is largely attributed to the adoption
of Western diets and sedentary lifestyles.

Figure 6.3 Age-Standardized Incidence and Mortality Rates of Colorectal
Cancer by World Bank Income Classification, 2012
Men

Women

Low-income
Lower-middle-income
(except India)
Upper-middle-income
(except China)
High-income
China
India
30

20
10
0
10
20
30
Age-standardized rate (world) per 100,000, 0–69 years
Incidence

Mortality

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.

INTERVENTIONS
Screening
CRC Screening Tests
Guaiac Fecal Occult Blood Test (gFOBT) gFOBT is a
stool test that indirectly detects blood in the stool that
may be caused by bleeding from CRC. A positive test is
not specific for the presence of human blood; however, it
may reflect blood from ingested animal meats, for example. gFOBT is supported by evidence from RCTs with
long-term follow-up and CRC mortality as the outcome.
RCTs of periodic (annual or biennial) gFOBT show a
reduction in mortality from CRC of 13 to 33 percent,
with up to 50 percent compliance with periodic gFOBT
(Hardcastle and others 1996; Kronborg and others 1996;
Mandel and others 1993; Towler and others 1998).
Individuals with a positive gFOBT must be followed up
by colonoscopy.
Fecal Immunochemical Test (FIT) FIT is a stool test
that uses an antibody against human globin, the protein part of hemoglobin. A positive FIT is specific for
human blood. There are no large-scale RCTs that have
evaluated FIT with long-term follow-up and CRC mortality as the outcome, although two RCTs are underway.
FIT is supported by RCTs of FIT versus gFOBT (van
Rossum and others 2008) and FIT versus colonoscopy
(Quintero and others 2012). These are cross-sectional
RCTs with cancer detection and advanced adenoma as
the outcomes. The RCT of FIT compared with gFOBT
shows that the use of FIT is associated with higher
adherence/compliance rates than the use of gFOBT, and

Colorectal Cancer

105

also that FIT is superior to gFOBT in detection rates and
positive predictive values for adenomas and cancer (van
Rossum and others 2008). The RCT of FIT compared
with colonoscopy showed higher participation in the
FIT group than in the colonoscopy group, and that the
numbers of subjects in whom CRC was detected were
similar in the two groups, but a greater number of subjects with adenomas were identified in the colonoscopy
group (Quintero and others 2012).
Flexible Sigmoidoscopy (FS) FS is an endoscopic procedure in which a flexible fiberoptic instrument is used
to examine the rectum and lower (distal) colon, unlike
colonoscopy, which examines the rectum and total
(upper and lower) colon. Cancers and precancerous
lesions, such as adenomas observed in this area, can be
removed or biopsied. Large-scale RCTs of FS, coupled
with colonoscopy for those who test positive, have shown
reductions in CRC incidence (Atkin and others 2010;
Schoen and others 2012; Segnan and others 2011) and
CRC mortality (Atkin and others 2010; Schoen and
others 2012) over a 10-year period. A meta-analysis of the
results from the published RCTs of FS screening reported,
in an intention-to-treat analysis, an 18 percent reduction
in relative risk of CRC incidence and a 28 percent reduction in CRC mortality (Elmunzer and others 2012).
Colonoscopy Colonoscopy is an examination of the
entire colon and rectum with a flexible fiberoptic endoscope. Colonoscopy detects asymptomatic
cancers, and precancerous lesions can be removed.
Evidence from the National Polyp Study, analyzed as
an observational cohort study, indicates that colonoscopy with polypectomy is associated with a reduction in CRC incidence and mortality (Winawer and
others 1993; Zauber and others 2012). No published
evidence from RCTs has evaluated screening colonoscopy with long-term follow-up and CRC mortality as the outcome. However, indirect evidence to
support screening colonoscopy comes from RCTs
of gFOBT, in which persons with a positive gFOBT
underwent colonoscopy. In these trials, colonoscopy
with polypectomy was responsible for the mortality
reduction associated with gFOBT screening. Further
indirect evidence comes from RCTs of FS screening,
which demonstrate a reduction in CRC mortality.
By extrapolation, it would be expected that since
colonoscopy evaluates the entire colon, screening
colonoscopy would be associated with a reduction in
CRC mortality that might exceed that observed for
screening FS. Several large-scale RCTs of colonoscopy
are underway, with CRC mortality as the primary
outcome. In the NordICC trial in Europe, screening

106

Cancer

colonoscopy is being compared with usual care. In the
COLONPREV trial in Spain and the CONFIRM trial
by the U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs, colonoscopy is being compared with FIT.
Fecal DNA A cross-sectional study comparing the
performance of a stool DNA prototype versus gFOBT
versus colonoscopy reported that the stool DNA test
detected a greater proportion of CRCs and CRCs plus
adenomas with high-grade dysplasia than the gFOBT,
51.6 percent vs. 12.9 percent, and 40.8 percent vs.
14.1 percent, respectively (Imperiale and others
2004). However, the majority of neoplastic lesions
was not detected by either test. Since then, stool
DNA technology has continued to evolve (Ahlquist
and others 2012). A large-scale, cross-sectional study
(DeeP-C) of a next-generation stool DNA test has
recently been published (Imperiale and others 2014)
and indicates 92.3 percent sensitivity for the detection
of CRC and 42.4 percent sensitivity for the detection
of advanced adenomas.
Computed Tomographic Colonography (CTC) CTC
is a computerized tomography examination of the
abdomen and pelvis in which imaging information,
when processed with special imaging software, provides images of the colon and rectum. Images are also
produced of structures outside the colon (extracolonic
findings). The technique requires bowel preparation
and colonic insufflation, but not conscious sedation,
as is generally required for colonoscopy. CTC does
not permit biopsy or polyp removal; colonoscopy
is required. The two largest reports evaluating CTC
in asymptomatic persons are cross-sectional studies that compared CTC and colonoscopy for the
detection of adenomas (Johnson and others 2008;
Pickhardt and others 2003). Taken together, these
studies found that CTC was comparable to colonoscopy for detecting adenomas ≥ 10 mm (pooled sensitivity was 92 percent), but fell short in detecting
smaller adenomas (6–9 mm).
Role of Colonoscopy in Diagnosis and Surveillance
Having adequate colonoscopy resources is a key aspect
in implementing CRC screening, because of the role of
colonoscopy in diagnosis and surveillance. When a less
invasive screening test—such as gFOBT, FIT, or FS—is
used, colonoscopy is required to investigate those with
a positive (abnormal) screen, and it is the final common
pathway to establish a diagnosis. Colonoscopy is also
recommended for surveillance, depending on the findings at the initial colonoscopy, which are used to stratify
risk for subsequent colorectal neoplasia.

Guidelines for Colonoscopic Surveillance In 2012,
the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on CRC/American
Cancer Society (USMSTF) published updated surveillance guidelines that take into account the serrated
neoplasia pathway (Lieberman and others 2012).
Based on the findings at the baseline colonoscopy,
the recommended surveillance intervals are as follows: 10 years for those with no polyps or small
(< 10 mm) hyperplastic polyps in the rectum or
sigmoid; 5–10 years for those with 1 or 2 small
(< 10 mm) tubular adenomas; three years for those
with three to 10 tubular adenomas, one or more
tubular adenomas ≥ 10 mm, one or more villous adenomas, or an adenoma with high-grade dysplasia; and
less than three years for those with more than 10 adenomas. When serrated lesions are detected at the
baseline colonoscopy, the recommended surveillance
intervals are as follows: five years for those with sessile
serrated polyps (SSPs) < 10 mm with no dysplasia,
three years for SSPs ≥ 10 mm or SSPs with dysplasia or
a traditional serrated adenoma, and one year for those
with serrated polyposis syndrome.
Colonoscopy Effectiveness in Usual Practice
Large-scale, population-based studies have shown that
lesions can be missed at colonoscopy, including adenomas and cancers (Baxter and others 2009; Bressler
and others 2007). It is often not possible to be certain that a CRC that was not detected at the time of
colonoscopy, but subsequently diagnosed, was a missed
cancer. The alternative explanation is that the “new”
cancer was not present at the time of the colonoscopy,
but arose and grew rapidly following the procedure.
These new or missed cancers have been referred to as
postcolonoscopy CRCs (Rabeneck and Paszat 2010) or
interval cancers.
Evidence from population-based, case-control studies shows that colonoscopy is associated with a reduction in overall CRC mortality; however, the magnitude
of the effect is less in the proximal colon (Baxter and
others 2009; Brenner and others 2011). This means
that in usual practice, colonoscopy is less effective in
the proximal colon. This finding is attributed to suboptimal colonoscopy quality or differences in tumor
biology between those cancers that arise in the proximal
compared with the distal colon. These findings have
given rise to renewed emphasis on the critical importance of colonoscopy quality and increased attention to
CRC carcinogenesis. In particular, the recognition that
lesions arising in the serrated neoplasia pathway have
been underdetected at colonoscopy may explain, in part,
the lesser effectiveness of colonoscopy in the proximal
(right) colon.

What are the possible reasons for postcolonoscopy
CRCs?
• First, the lesion may not have been seen because the
cecum was not reached during the procedure (reaching the cecum is more challenging technically than
reaching the distal colon); the bowel preparation was
not adequate and the mucosa was not fully visualized
(the upper or proximal colon is more difficult to
clean); or the technique was inadequate, that is, the
lesion was simply not seen.
• Second, a prior polypectomy may have been incomplete. Polypectomy is the key to reducing CRC
incidence following colonoscopy.
• Third, a rapidly progressing CRC may not have been
present at the initial colonoscopy, which may have
been truly negative.
What all of this means is that colonoscopy fails
to detect a small but clinically important percentage
of lesions, and this lack of effectiveness is more pronounced in the right colon, making meticulous technique paramount.
CRC Screening Guidelines
International Agency for Research on Cancer In
2010, the International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC), an agency of the World Health Organization
(WHO), published a landmark document, European
Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Colorectal Cancer
Screening and Diagnosis (Segnan, Patnick, and von
Karsa 2010). The recommendations are based on a
comprehensive and systematic review of the scientific
evidence and are intended for organized screening
programs (see below). The guidelines recommended
annual or biennial screening with gFOBT, FIT screening at an interval not to exceed three years and at a
minimum to include screening for those ages 60–64
years, and FS screening at an interval not less than
10 years, with the best age range for screening between
ages 55 and 64 years but not exceeding age 74 years.
Colonoscopy was not recommended for CRC screening
in the European Union.
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF) USPSTF
recommends routine screening for average risk persons
ages 50–75 years, no routine screening for persons ages
76–85 years, and no screening for persons older than age
85 years (USPSTF 2008). USPSTF recommends annual
screening with high-sensitivity gFOBT, or FS every five
years with high-sensitivity gFOBT every three years,
or colonoscopy every 10 years. USPSTF did not assess
barium enema because of lack of evidence and declining

Colorectal Cancer

107

use, and it concluded that the evidence was insufficient
to assess the benefits and harms of CTC and fecal DNA
for CRC screening.
U.S. Multi-Society Task Force/American Cancer
Society (USMSTF) USMSTF defines two categories of
screening test (Levin and others 2008). In the first category are tests that primarily detect cancers. Tests that
are recommended in this category for screening persons
at average risk (age 50 years and older, no symptoms,
no family history of the disease) are the following:
annual high-sensitivity gFOBT, annual FIT, or stool
DNA (interval uncertain). In the second category are
tests that detect cancers and adenomas. Recommended
tests in this category for screening persons at average
risk are: FS every five years, colonoscopy every 10 years,
double-contrast barium enema every five years, or CTC
every five years.
Organized Versus Opportunistic Screening
Screening is not simply a test; it is a process. Chapter 12, this
volume, discusses organized and opportunistic screening
in detail. Compared with opportunistic screening, organized screening focuses much greater attention on the
quality of the screening process, including follow-up of
participants (Miles and others 2004). Thus, a key advantage of organized screening is that it provides greater
protection against the possible harms of screening. Poor
follow-up of those who test positive may occur, for
example, when those with a positive (abnormal) FIT fail
to undergo colonoscopy, the recommended next step in
the screening process (Miles and others 2004).
Organized CRC Screening Worldwide The
International Colorectal Cancer Screening Network
(ICRCSN) is a consortium of organized initiatives
delivering screening to their populations. In 2008,
ICRCSN conducted a survey of full or pilot programs
that fulfill at least four of the IARC criteria for an organized screening program (Benson and others 2012).
At that time, 43 organized screening programs were
identified, of which 35 programs had been collecting
data for at least 12 months and were eligible for the survey. Of the 35 programs from 24 countries, 26 were full
programs and nine were pilot programs. The majority
of the programs were in Europe, with a few from North
America, South America, and the Western Pacific. The
majority (28) used stool-based tests as their primary
screening test: 16 used gFOBT, nine used the FIT, and
three used both tests. Wide variations were observed in
the ability of the jurisdictions to report on performance
indicators, such as the participation rate, the gFOBT or
FIT positivity rate, and the cancer detection rate.

108

Cancer

Performance of Organized Screening Programs In
general, a period of at least 10 years is required
to plan, pilot, and implement an organized CRC
screening program (von Karsa and others 2010).
The European Guidelines define key performance
indicators for CRC screening, including participation,
follow-up colonoscopy among those with a positive
gFOBT, retention rates, cancer detection rates, and
CRC mortality (von Karsa and others 2010). High performance in all of these measures is required in CRC
screening programs. A few programs have published
early results for participation. For example, Ontario
launched its provincewide, organized screening program, ColonCancerCheck, in 2008. The program is
based on gFOBT for those at average risk and colonoscopy for those at increased risk, defined by a family
history of one or more first-degree relatives with the
disease. The target population—men and women ages
50–74 years—is 3.4 million. Prior to launch of the program, gFOBT participation in 2003−04 was 15 percent;
in 2010–11, gFOBT participation was 29.8 percent
(Rabeneck and others 2014).
Some high-income Asian countries have begun to
implement organized screening: Japan, the Republic
of Korea, and Singapore. Currently, organized,
population-based screening programs do not exist
in the majority of LMICs. As MICs develop organized cancer screening programs, CRC screening
is under consideration. There are or have been
pilot studies of CRC screening conducted in several upper-middle-income countries and economies
using gFOBT, including Thailand (Lampang province: http://www.iarc.fr /en/staffdirectory/displaystaff.php?id=10114); Shanghai is embarking on a
pilot study, as is Argentina (Manzur 2013). These
pilot studies are important to lay the groundwork for
national programs (Goss and others 2013).
Other countries offer opportunistic screening, largely
restricted to the population covered by work-based
health insurance. As a high-income economy, Taiwan,
China, offers free screening under the national health
insurance program (Ng and Wong 2013). Formal sector
employees and/or government employees in much of
Latin America and the Caribbean are covered for cancer
screening. However, most MICs do not have organized
screening programs.
International Efforts to Advance CRC Screening:
IARC The vision of the Early Detection and Prevention
(EDP) Section of the IARC is to serve as the major global
resource for high-quality scientific and evidence-based
information on cancer prevention and early detection
interventions. The EDP Section evaluates and reports

on interventions for early detection and prevention.
The findings guide the development of public health
policy, with a particular focus on cancer control in
LMICs. The EDP Section’s work catalyzes the implementation of CRC prevention and early detection programs
that follow the principles of organized screening as
outlined, to the extent feasible.
Experience from the European Union shows that
a minimum period of 10 years is required to establish a population-based cancer screening program,
with any impact taking even longer (Lee and others
2013). Examples of early detection and prevention work
include the European Guidelines for Quality Assurance
in Colorectal Cancer Screening and Diagnosis (Segnan,
Patnick, and von Karsa 2010). In addition, a network
of reference and training centers (European School
of Screening Management) has been created that is
developing and piloting training courses for planning, implementation, quality assurance, and evaluation
of population-based cancer screening programs. The
European School of Screening Management is intended
to serve as a platform to connect and facilitate collaboration among relevant personnel from HICs and LMICs.
Further, the EDP Section provides scientific and technical support to upper-middle-income countries, such as
Albania and Belarus, to assist them in moving forward
with population-based cancer screening programs.
Other International Organizations and Networks
Promoting Screening The International Cancer
Screening Network is a consortium of countries that
have active population-based cancer screening programs
and active efforts to evaluate and improve the processes
and outcomes from cancer screening in practice. These
programs can be national or subnational in scope, and
established or pilot-based. Administered by the Applied
Research Program of the U.S. National Cancer Institute,
the consortium includes 33 countries and holds biennial
meetings; specific activities are moved forward through
working groups. Participation in the International
Cancer Screening Network is open to any country that
has initiated a population-based screening program.
The World Endoscopy Organization is a federation
of national digestive endoscopy societies. Its mission
includes the advancement of digestive endoscopy for the
diagnosis and treatment of gastrointestinal diseases in
underserved areas. The World Endoscopy Organization
has an active CRC Screening Committee that holds
annual meetings in the East Asia and Pacific region,
Europe, and the United States, in conjunction with the
major regional scientific meetings of gastroenterology
societies. The meetings provide a forum to facilitate the
presentation and discussion of new knowledge related

to CRC screening and sharing of best practices across
the world.
The International Digestive Cancer Alliance promotes the screening, early detection, and primary
prevention of digestive cancers worldwide, including development of practice guidelines (http://www
.worldgastroenterology.org/assets/downloads/en/pdf
/guidelines/06_colorectal_cancer_screening.pdf). The
International Digestive Cancer Alliance recommended
staging the approach to screening, with respect to the
choice of screening test, to the resources available in a
given country (Winawer 2007).
Diagnosis
In HICs, persons with CRC can present in several ways:
• First, the cancer can be detected as a result of
screening. When gFOBT, FIT, or FS is used as the
initial screening test, colonoscopy is undertaken as
a diagnostic test to evaluate those with an abnormal
screening test. During the colonoscopy, polyps are
removed and masses or other suspicious lesions are
either removed or biopsied to establish a pathological diagnosis.
• Second, the cancer can be detected when an individual undergoes colonoscopy to evaluate large bowel
symptoms, such as rectal bleeding, anemia, or a
change in bowel habits.
• Third, some individuals may present as an emergency, such as a large bowel obstruction, in which
case the cancer may be diagnosed at surgery without
prior diagnostic evaluation.
Staging
When the cancer is diagnosed in nonemergency presentations, staging and complete visualization of the
colon and rectum with colonoscopy are undertaken.
Complete colonoscopy is also undertaken for the
purpose of detecting synchronous cancers (present in
3–5 percent of cases); if not done prior to definitive
treatment, it should be done within 6–12 months.
Colonoscopy will also detect synchronous premalignant adenomas, which can be removed to reduce the
risk of subsequent cancer. Barium enema, a radiological test, was used to diagnose CRC prior to the widespread availability of colonoscopy in HICs and may
still be relevant in LMICs.
Clinical staging to determine the extent of disease focuses on imaging the liver and lungs, the two
most common sites of spread. In HICs, computerized
tomography is used to detect these distant metastases

Colorectal Cancer

109

(Leufkens and others 2011). Chest X-ray and abdominal
ultrasound are less expensive alternative tests that can be
used in lower-income settings.
Pathologic stage I refers to CRCs that are confined
to the surface of the bowel. Stage II means the cancer
has invaded through the muscle layer of the bowel wall.
Stage III cancers involve the local lymph nodes. These
stages are usually determined by examining the tumor
pathologically after surgery. Stage IV cancers have spread
(metastasized) into other organs.
Treatment
Surgery for Colon Cancer
The cornerstone of treatment is surgical resection. For
early-stage cancers, surgery alone may cure the disease.
For colon cancer, the preferred procedure is a hemicolectomy (resection of either the right or the left colon) with
wide (> 5 cm) margins of normal colon. This procedure
can typically be performed by a general surgeon. Where
available, minimally invasive (laparoscopically-assisted)
techniques have produced similar long-term results
compared with an open procedure, but with shorter
hospital stays and increased speed of recovery. Achieving
these benefits requires an experienced surgeon and
specialized instruments, however; even in HICs, the
cost-effectiveness of this approach has been questioned.
A minimum of 12 lymph nodes in the surgical specimen
is required for adequate staging and is associated with
better outcomes than a lesser dissection. In patients
presenting with stage IV colon cancer where cure is not
possible, if the primary (that is, the site of the original
cancer) is not associated with symptoms and the metastatic disease (that is, the sites where the disease has
spread) is anticipated to be controlled with chemotherapy, the primary tumor does not necessarily need to
be resected.
Surgery for Rectal Cancer
Surgery for rectal cancer is much more complex. Highvolume, specialized surgeons and centers have been
associated with better outcomes: less likely to need an
ostomy bag, lower rates of local recurrence, better overall
survival.
• Mid-to-upper rectal tumors can be resected with a
low anterior resection, which leaves the rectal sphincter intact, thereby avoiding colostomy.
• Lower-lying tumors, that is, those within 2–3 cm of the
anal sphincter or levator muscles, require an abdominal perineal resection and creation of a permanent
stoma requiring colostomy. Surgeon skill often determines how low a low anterior resection can be done.

110

Cancer

• Total meso-rectal excision, the meticulous, sharp
dissection of perirectal tissues with removal of the
primary tumor and lymph nodes all in one piece, has
been shown to decrease local relapse rates.
• To avoid a stoma, transanal excision of small, earlystage distal tumors with good prognostic features
can be considered. (Good is defined here as T1N0,
< 3 cm, < 30 percent circumference, not poorly differentiated, and no lymphovascular or perivascular
invasion.)
Radiation
The availability of radiation therapy is most relevant
for cancers of the rectum, as local recurrence is much
more common than in colon cancer, because of the
inability to obtain wide margins and the lack of a serosal
barrier. Radiation therapy has improved local control
for persons with stages II and III rectal cancer (Hoffe,
Shridhar, and Biajioli 2010). Evidence suggests that
compared with postoperative radiation, preoperative
radiation is associated with improved surgical outcomes
and disease-free survival (Sebag-Montefiore and others
2009). This decision depends on determining the stage
of cancer preoperatively, which requires diagnostic services such as magnetic resonance imaging or specialized
endorectal ultrasound capability. Where these are not
available, postoperative delivery of radiation and chemotherapy still provides important benefits. In settings
with access to radiation but difficulty obtaining or
delivering chemotherapy, or where travel requirements
preclude the 5.5 weeks of daily long-course radiotherapy,
short-course radiotherapy may be a preferred option
(Içli and others 2010).
Chemotherapy
Evidence-based practice guidelines recommend six
months of adjuvant chemotherapy following surgery
for persons with stage III colon cancer (Benson and
others 2000) and stages II and III rectal cancer. FOLFOX
(FOLinic acid [leucovorin], Fluorouracil, OXaliplatin)
is the preferred regimen. If chemoradiotherapy is given
for rectal cancer, only four months of chemotherapy are
required. In addition to the cost of the drugs, however,
systemic chemotherapy always requires the ability to
monitor blood counts for safety and may require venous
access devices.
Management of Metastatic Colorectal Cancer
Metastatic CRC is treated the same way, regardless of
whether it started in the colon or rectum. Although
metastatic disease is generally incurable, it is increasingly
recognized that, where possible, in 10–20 percent of
patients, aggressive resection of liver and lung metastases

may lead to cure 20–30 percent of the time. Such surgery
requires highly specialized training and centers, even in
HICs. Alternatives to surgical resection, such as radiofrequency ablation and stereotactic body radiotherapy, can
provide long-term control in these situations, but surgical resection is preferred where feasible. Perioperative
chemotherapy with FOLFOX has been shown to improve
disease-free survival in this setting. For the majority of
patients with metastatic CRC, however, treatment is palliative, with an expected median survival with surgery
alone of 6–12 months.
International Partnerships for CRC Care
As with CRC screening, international partnership
arrangements can support diagnosis and treatment in
LMICs. The American Society of Clinical Oncology
(http://www.asco.org) established an International
Affairs Committee in 2007 with a goal of reducing disparities in cancer care and maximizing chances of survival
through the global exchange of oncologic knowledge. The
National Comprehensive Cancer Network (http://www
.nccn.org) provides translations of many of its guidelines into other languages, such as Chinese, Japanese,
and Spanish, and has published local adaptations of
guidelines, for example, for countries in the Middle East
and North Africa. One National Comprehensive Cancer
Network institution, the MD Anderson Cancer Center
at the University of Texas, lists 28 sister institutions,
as well as affiliates in at least 18 countries, 10 of these
in LMICs (http://www.mdanderson.org/education-and
-research/education-and-training/schools-and-programs
/global-academic-programs/sister-institutions/index
.html). Similar partnerships exist with other major
cancer centers.

COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF CRC SCREENING
AND TREATMENT
A systematic search of the literature on CRC screening
and treatment was undertaken using PubMed from 2004
to 2013 to identify relevant articles for LMICs, as well
as selected high-income Asian countries and economies
that can help serve as regional models, principally Hong
Kong SAR, China; the Republic of Korea; Singapore;
and Taiwan, China. The parameters were medical subject heading terms (colorectal neoplasms, colonic neoplasms, rectal neoplasms, CRC, colon cancer, or rectal
cancer); colonoscopy or sigmoidoscopy; and multiple
terms related to economic evaluation, cost, cost analysis,
and cost-effectiveness.
This search was supplemented by a nonsystematic
search using the Internet for certain LMICs. For HICs,

a fairly recent publication, Greenberg and others
(2010), was used. This is a systematic review of the costeffectiveness literature for various cancers, primarily
for industrialized countries, and has the advantage
that all the costs have been standardized to those of a
common year. For additional analyses, comparing the
cost-effectiveness of CRC screening and treatment with
screening and treatment for other cancers in LMICs, see
chapter 16 in this volume (Horton and Gavreau 2015).
Screening
Cost-effectiveness studies for CRC screening in the
United States, several European countries, and highincome Asian countries and economies (Hong Kong
SAR, China; Korea; Singapore; and Taiwan, China) generally conclude that screening is cost-effective compared
with no screening. The cost-effectiveness of several
screening options can be considered. Guidelines generally recommend that screening should begin at age
50 years (except for those with strong family history of
CRC), but it can stop at different ages (such as 70, 75,
80, or 85). Tests can be undertaken in combination, such
as FS combined with a sensitive gFOBT. The use of an
efficiency frontier for each individual country can help to
identify the most appropriate screening strategy given the
budget constraints (see figure 6.4 for the United States).
Studies in the United States
Cost-effectiveness studies in the United States generally
have used one of a few large cancer microsimulation
models. Comparative studies (for example, Pignone
and others 2002 and Pignone, Russell, and Wagner
2005) suggest that results are sensitive to the parameters used, particularly cost. The models also entail
different assumptions about disease progression that
also affect relative test performance (Pignone, Russell,
and Wagner 2005). Since the review by Pignone and
others (2002), three microsimulation models for CRC
have become part of the U.S. National Cancer Institute
consortium for Cancer Intervention and Surveillance
Modeling Network (CISNET), a consortium of National
Cancer Institute-sponsored investigators that use statistical modeling to improve the understanding of cancer
control interventions in prevention, screening, and treatment, and their effects on population trends in incidence
and mortality. These models can be used to guide public
health research and priorities.
Figure 6.4 shows the results for cost-effectiveness
analysis from one CISNET model, the Microsimulation
Screening Analysis model from Erasmus University
Medical Center, for eight CRC screening strategies
beginning at age 50 years. Figure 6.4 is a modification of

Colorectal Cancer

111

Figure 6.4 Discounted Costs and Discounted Life Years Gained for Eight
Colorectal Cancer Screening Strategies and the Efficient Frontier
Costs without screening

Discounted life years gained per 1,000, 50 year olds

120

100

80

60

40

20

0
$2,000

$2,500

$3,000

$3,500

Discounted total costs (thousands) per 1,000, 50 year olds
Efficient
frontier
FS + HII

HII
FS + HS

FIT

FS

FS + FIT

COL

HS

Source: Zauber 2010, based on Knudsen and others 2010.
Note: COL = colonoscopy; FIT = fecal immunochemical test; FS = flexible sigmoidoscopy; HII = Hemoccult
II (fecal occult blood test, FOBT); HS = Hemoccult Sensa (FOBT). This analysis assumes 100 percent
adherence with each strategy.

a larger analysis as given by Knudsen and others (2010),
which assumed that subjects were 100 percent adherent
to screening tests and subsequent diagnostic or treatment for those with positive tests or cancer diagnosis.
Gains in life years are plotted on the y-axis and total
costs are plotted on the x-axis. Each possible intervention strategy is represented by a point. The higher the
point is, the more effective is the screening strategy; the
further to the right the point is, the more expensive is
the screening strategy (Marks 2002).
Cost-effectiveness analysis does not select which
strategy is economically preferred overall, but only
which strategy is the most effective in terms of life years
gained for a given level of desired (or possible) expenditure. The eight CRC screening strategies are ranked in
order of the procedure, with the least life years gained
relative to no screening (Knudsen and others 2010). The
strategies are then compared incrementally by ordering of the life years gained relative to the costs of each
screening strategy. Those strategies that have the most
life years gained for a given level of cost are considered

112

Cancer

to be on the efficiency frontier. In this example, the
lowest-cost option of those options on the frontier is
the less sensitive gFOBT (Hemoccult II). However, if
the budget available for testing increases, then a more
sensitive gFOBT (Hemoccult Sensa) or FIT is the next
best choice for cost relative to life years gained with
screening. The next choice would be FS with some type
of fecal occult blood test (FOBT). Colonoscopy lies just
below the efficient frontier, with the rankings for life
years gained relative to costs similar to those of FS with
gFOBT or FIT. The rankings using two other models
(the SimCRC model from University of Minnesota
and Massachusetts General Hospital, and the CRCSPIN model from Group Health Research Institute; see
http://cisnet.cancer.gov/profiles/) were broadly similar,
although the absolute cost per life year gained differed
between models. All of the strategies had average costs
per life year gained (compared with no screening) well
within the threshold considered cost-effective in the
United States (below US$50,000 per life year gained).
Taken together, the results from the U.S. analyses
using simulation models suggest the following:
• Screening is cost-effective; since compliance is not
100 percent, encouraging screening by any of a small
group of strategies will save life years.
• Where the total budget available is limited, the
lowest-cost testing strategy involves gFOBT.
• The differences in the cost-effectiveness of some
strategies are modest and susceptible to variation in
assumptions.
• Knowledge of details of disease progression is limited,
for example, how untreated adenomas progress to
cancer or how this progression varies by individual
characteristics such as age, gender, and family history.
Different assumptions regarding disease progression
affect the results of the simulation model.
The evidence base for different screening methods
continues to evolve. FS and colonoscopy can be performed by appropriately trained nonphysicians, including nurses (Maule 1994; Wallace and others 1999).
Newer generations of chemotherapy agents increase
life expectancy modestly, but they considerably increase
treatment costs; accordingly, most screening methods
(although not colonoscopy by a narrow margin) remain
cost-saving (Lansdorp-Vogelaar and others 2009).
European Studies
The European studies identified by the systematic
review by Pignone and others (2002) (two studies of
gFOBT and one of FS, in Denmark, Norway, and the
United Kingdom) all supported the conclusion that

screening is cost-effective compared with no screening,
and the cost per life year saved was lower than in the
United States because of the higher overall medical
costs in the United States (Gyrd-Hansen, Søgaard, and
Kronborg 1998; Norum 1998; Whynes and others 1998).
Studies in High-Income Economies in Asia
Table 6.1 summarizes cost-effectiveness results for four
studies of Asian economies, with the standardized
model for the United States from Pignone, Russell, and
Wagner (2005) for comparison. The Asian economies
are Hong Kong SAR, China; the Republic of Korea;
Singapore; and Taiwan, China. Observations from these
results include the following:
• Screening in the four Asian economies is costeffective, although the simpler models used in some
studies may underestimate costs.

• Relative costs of procedures such as colonoscopy/FS
and colonoscopy/gFOBT vary by country, which is
likely to affect rankings.
• For the Republic of Korea, for example, it has been
argued that colonoscopy reimbursement rates are
artificially low and do not reflect cost (Park, Yun, and
Kwon 2005). This is likely to affect the relative ranking of strategies for that country.
These four Asian economies do not all have published
cost-effectiveness thresholds used for public decision
making. However, from the WHO Commission on
Health (WHO 2001), health interventions costing up
to three times per capita gross domestic product per
disability-adjusted life year saved should be considered.
By this criterion, all the methods of CRC screening considered here (gFOBT, FS, and colonoscopy) would be
acceptable in these four economies. Another study for

Table 6.1 Selected Costs and Cost-Effectiveness of Screening, Per Capita GDP, and Colorectal Cancer Incidence
in Four High-Income Asian Economies Compared with the United States

Item cost or value (US$)
gFOBT

Korea, Rep.
2004b

United States
2005a
10

1.91

Hong Kong
SAR, China
2003d

Taiwan, China
2004c
0.60

4

Singapore
2004e
5.59

Colonoscopy (diagnostic)

625

43.80

66.20

450

368.72

Colonoscopy
(polyp removal)

900

—

—

830

446.93

Sigmoidoscopy

200

22.18

35.30

244

134.08

Treat CRC, local

24,000

4,291.67

3,117.60

16,552

11,173.18

Treat CRC, regional

31,000

—

7,705.90

27,321

19,553.07

Treat CRC, distant

40,000

8,583.33

7,647.10

71,751

—

Colon perforation

24,000

2,500

1,617.60

10,790

4,863.69

Cost-effectiveness versus no
screening

gFOBT 9,676
COL 21,000
(median of 5 models,
standardized
assumptions)

COL (5 years) 1,142;
others dominated

gFOBT 70
FS 594
COL 407

gFOBT 6,222
FS 8,044
COL 7,211

gFOBT 91
FS 190
COL 225

46,760

19,028

17,461

31,426

34,466

34.1 men
25.0 women

46.9 men
25.6 women

40.2 men
29.7 women
(Taiwan, China)

50.1 (crude, men
and women
combined)

34.1 men
25.0 women

US$/LYS

Per capita GDPf
g

CRC incidence /100,000
(age-standardized
to world population)

Note: COL = colonoscopy; CRC = colorectal cancer; FS = flexible sigmoidoscopy; GDP = gross domestic product; gFOBT = guaiac fecal occult blood test; LYS = life years saved;
— = not available.
a. Pignone, Russell, and Wagner 2005.
b. Park, Yun, and Kwon 2005.
c. Wu and others 2006.
d. Tsoi and others 2008.
e. Wong, Leong, and Leong 2004.
f. World Bank 2013, except Taiwan, China, which is http://www.indexmundi.com.
g. Bray and others 2013, except Hong Kong SAR, China, which is Tsoi and others 2008.

Colorectal Cancer

113

Hong Kong SAR, China, for women only (Woo, Kim,
and Leung 2007), concluded that CRC screening had
higher costs than for men per disability-adjusted life year
saved and would not be cost-effective (CRC incidence
rates in women are lower than in men).

be cost-effective in LMICs. This is likely to be a better
guide if relative costs and “standard care”—the alternative to which a particular treatment is compared—
are reasonably similar.

Studies in LMICs
Two global cost-effectiveness models report estimates
of cost-effectiveness of interventions for various
world regions. Ginsberg and others (2010) conclude
that expanding treatment in low-income countries is
a higher priority than screening. Ginsberg and others
(2012) come to a similar conclusion when focusing
on Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa, and they
conclude that screening colonoscopy is cost-effective
in Sub-Saharan Africa. However, the feasibility of
implementing this approach in light of resource availability and health system infrastructure limitations
was not addressed.
A systematic search did not identify other studies of
the cost-effectiveness of screening in LMICs. One other
study was found from an unsystematic search using
the Internet for the Islamic Republic of Iran (Barouni
and others 2012). From the results presented, it is possible to conclude that colonoscopy every 10 years is
cost-effective, but not very cost-effective, in the Islamic
Republic of Iran, but that gFOBT screening is not
cost-effective. There are problems with the calculation
of the incremental cost-effectiveness ratios in this study,
but enough information is given to permit the reader to
recalculate them.
We anticipate that CRC screening would be equally
cost-effective in urban areas of other upper-middleincome countries where incidence rates approach levels
similar to those in HICs (30 or more per 100,000 in
men, age-standardized rates). Lambert, Sauvaget, and
Sankaranarayanan (2009, 255) conclude that population
screening for CRC is not the highest priority in most
LMICs, but that it deserves to be developed “in limited
regions of large emerging countries where there is a
shift to Western lifestyle and an aging population,” and
they point to Mumbai; Hong Kong SAR, China; and São
Paulo as examples.

RECOMMENDATIONS

Treatment
No literature on the cost-effectiveness of treatment
for CRC was found for LMICs. Chapter 16 summarizes the evidence of cost-effectiveness of treatment
in HICs, making the assumption that treatments that
are “very cost-effective” in HICs are the first candidates for consideration in MICs, while treatments
that are “not cost-effective” in HICs are unlikely to

114

Cancer

Country income level does not have to dictate the availability of screening, diagnosis, and treatment. Countries
can help overcome resource constraints by accessing
technical assistance from the IARC and international
networks, or from partnerships with cancer centers or
cancer agencies in other countries. Local champions
are essential for moving CRC screening and treatment
forward as a priority.
Table 6.2 summarizes the authors’ recommendations
on how screening and diagnosis for CRC might be
implemented in four different resource environments:
LICs, rural areas of MICs, urban areas of MICs, and
HICs. These correspond approximately to the basic,
limited, enhanced, and maximal resource environments
for a similar exercise undertaken for breast cancer by
the Global Breast Health Initiative and discussed in
chapter 3. Recommendations for the treatment of CRC
in these resource environments are found in online
annex 6B (tables 6B.1 through 6B.5). These recommendations provide initial guidance only and need to be
validated by a larger international expert group.
Low-Income Countries
In LICs, the incidence of CRC is relatively low; other
diseases—including other cancers—are a higher
priority for screening and treatment. Laying the
foundation for cancer screening and treatment is
important. This process includes investing in public
health and primary health care where screening is
initiated, in hospital systems, and in a cancer registry. Investments in health require medical personnel,
as well as good systems for monitoring and evaluation and quality control. Smaller countries lacking
specific resources, such as radiation facilities and
specialized laboratories, may need to rely on other
countries in the same region.
Even in LICs, surgery for colon cancer at a good
district hospital is possible to save lives and improve the
quality of remaining life. If colonoscopy is unavailable
as a diagnostic tool, barium enema may be an option.
Radiation therapy is available only in limited volumes, if
at all, and laboratory services required for chemotherapy
are not likely to be available. Pain management for latestage cancers is an ethical imperative, since the ability to
treat effectively is extremely limited.

Table 6.2 Proposed Strategies for Colorectal Cancer Screening and Diagnosis, by Country Resource Level
Level of
resources

General

Detection and diagnosis

Basic

• Build capacity: human, physical (for
example, radiation capacity), cancer
registry

• Barium enema if colonoscopy not available; in emergency situations, may be
diagnosed at surgery

Limited

• Establish capacity for colonoscopy
(needed for diagnosis)

• Opportunistic screening for those covered by health insurance
• Diagnostic colonoscopy (or barium enema) for those with symptoms

• Engage in partnership arrangements with
cancer centers to build capacity
• Establish national guidelines
• Build quality assurance for lab testing
Enhanced

• Join international screening networks
• Provide support to less-well-resourced
countries in region

• Establish organized screening in high-incidence cities/regions starting at age
50 years in persons at average risk: use annual or biennial sensitive gFOBT
or FIT; FS (see text for discussion of interval); or colonoscopy every 10 years
• Considerable infrastructure is required to support organized screening,
including invitations, recalls, reminders, tracking screening test results,
ensuring follow-up of those with an abnormal screening test, etc.

Maximal

• National (or jurisdiction-wide) organized screening: starting at age 50 years
in persons at average risk: use annual or biennial sensitive gFOBT or FIT; FS
(see text for discussion of interval); or colonoscopy every 10 years; in those
at increased risk because of family history, consider colonoscopy

Note: Since no international consensus-setting exercise has occurred, this categorization represents a basis for further discussion and work and not a definitive analysis. The basic
resource level is assumed to correspond to low-income countries (limited or no access to radiation and likely insufficient support for blood chemistry to undertake chemotherapy).
The limited resource level corresponds to rural areas of middle-income countries, where distances to radiation and chemotherapy resources make their use in treatment difficult. In
urban areas of middle-income countries (enhanced level), radiation therapy is available, as are many chemotherapy drugs no longer under patent. The maximal level corresponds to
resource availability in high-income countries. See chapter 16 in this volume for more detailed discussion of resource levels. The recommendations are cumulative: any intervention
that is feasible at a lower resource level is also an option at higher resource levels. Blank cells indicate that no additional options of a particular type of treatment are available at
the particular resource level considered. FIT = fecal immunochemical test; FS = flexible sigmoidoscopy; gFOBT = guaiac fecal occult blood test.

Middle-Income Countries
In MICs, there is an increase (more pronounced
initially in urban areas) in CRC incidence and the
ability to intervene. Opportunistic screening increases
for those covered by health insurance. Those countries that have already begun organized screening for
other cancers (including countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean and upper-middle-income Asia;
see chapter 12 in this volume [Sullivan, Sullivan, and
Ginsburg 2015]) may decide to implement screening
initially as a pilot study in selected urban regions. Other
regions that are beginning organized screening for other
cancers may decide to incorporate screening as well, for
example, by developing programs in cities in Asia.
Priority countries are those where age-standardized
CRC incidence rates in men are more than 30 per 100,000
(for example, Hungary, Serbia, and other countries in
Eastern Europe), in addition to those economies with
existing pilot programs, such as Argentina. Countries
where CRC incidence rates in men approach 20 per

100,000 may need to begin planning (for example,
countries such as Cuba, Lebanon, and Malaysia). Data
are not available using GLOBOCAN for individual
cities, but similar CRC incidence thresholds could be
used to consider when to begin to take action on CRC
screening.
For CRC screening, gFOBT is inexpensive; however,
additional investments are needed to implement all the
components of organized screening. MICs initiating
organized CRC screening may be advised to use FIT
rather than gFOBT; doing so may become more attractive if a larger demand for such tests results in a decrease
in the unit costs of the kits.
MICs also have more resources for treatment and
can extend this to a larger proportion of the population.
As cancers are detected earlier, the goal of treatment
shifts from palliation to cure. MICs can be active participants in international networks and local centers of
excellence and can provide support for other countries
in their region.

Colorectal Cancer

115

High-Income Countries
In HICs, cost-effectiveness considerations suggest that
FIT, FS accompanied by a sensitive gFOBT or FIT, or
colonoscopy are options for screening. The Republic
of Korea and Singapore, which started their screening programs more recently than European countries,
have opted to use FIT. Adherence to screening varies;
although each test has its advocates, the best test is the
one that gets done, and done well. A wider range of
treatment options is feasible in these countries, which
typically have higher cost-effectiveness thresholds.

CONCLUSIONS
The burden of CRC is increasing worldwide. There is
an unparalleled opportunity for prevention and early
detection of CRC, based on our knowledge of colorectal
carcinogenesis. The implementation of effective screening tests, both stool-based (gFOBT, FIT) and endoscopic
(FS, colonoscopy), coupled with advances in treatment
(colonoscopic polypectomy, surgery, radiation therapy,
and chemotherapy) are cost-effective approaches.
Since screening is a process, it is most effective when
delivered within an organized program, requiring infrastructure and resources to ensure the benefits while
minimizing the harms. CRC screening and treatment
are becoming priorities in an increasing number of
countries, as health resources are enhanced and changes
in lifestyles and risk factors lead to a rise in incidence.
Research on the cost-effectiveness of options in these
countries is needed, ideally adapting available, wellconstructed models to these environments. The development of regional CRC screening guidelines would be
helpful; the resource-based recommendations outlined
in this chapter may be useful in that process.

NOTES
World Bank Income Classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows based on estimates of gross national income (GNI) per
capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries (LICs) = US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries (MICs) are subdivided:
a) lower-middle-income = US$1,046–US$4,125
b) upper-middle-income (UMICs) = US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries (HICs) = US$12,746 or more.
1. Maps and figures in this chapter are based on incidence
and mortality estimates for ages 0–69, consistent with
reporting in all DCP3 volumes. Global cancer statistics
are estimates for 2012 and have been provided by the
International Agency for Research on Cancer from its

116

Cancer

GLOBOCAN 2012 database. Observable population-based
data were derived from Cancer Incidence in Five Continents,
10th edition and for trends over time from CI5 Plus (http://
ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx). The discussion of burden, including risk factors, however, includes all ages unless
otherwise noted. Interventions also apply to all age groups,
except where age ranges or cutoffs are specified.

REFERENCES
Ahlquist, D. A., H. Zou, M. Domanico, D. W. Mahoney,
T. C. Yab, and others. 2012. “Next-Generation Stool DNA
Test Accurately Detects Colorectal Cancer and Large
Adenomas.” Gastroenterology 142: 248–56.
Anderson, B. O., J. Lipscomb, R. H. Murillo, and D. B. Thomas.
“Breast Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Atkin, W. S., R. Edwards, I. Kralj-Hans, K. Wooldrage, A. R. Hart,
and others. 2010. “Once-Only Flexible Sigmoidoscopy
Screening in Prevention of Colorectal Cancer: A Multicentre
Randomised Controlled Trial.” The Lancet 375 (9726):
1624–33.
Barouni, M., M. H. Larizadeh, A. Sabermahani, and H. Ghaderi.
2012. “Markov’s Modeling for Screening Strategies for
Colorectal Cancer.” Asia Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention
13: 5125–29.
Baxter, N. N., M. A. Goldwasser, L. F. Paszat, R. Saskin,
D. R. Urbach, and others. 2009. “Association of Colonoscopy
and Death from Colorectal Cancer: A Population-Based,
Case-Control Study.” Annals of Internal Medicine 150: 1–8.
Benson, V. S., W. S. Atkin, J. Green, M. R. Nadel, J. Patnick,
and others. 2012. “Toward Standardizing and Reporting
Colorectal Cancer Screening Indicators on an International
Level: The International Colorectal Cancer Screening
Network.” International Journal of Cancer 130 (12):
2961–73.
Benson, A. B., M. A. Choti, A. M. Cohen, J. H. Doroshow,
C. Fuchs, and others. 2000. “NCCN Practice Guidelines for
Colorectal Cancer.” Oncology (Williston Park) 14: 203–12.
Bray, F., J. S. Ren, E. Masuyer, and J. Ferlay. 2013. “Estimates
of Global Cancer Prevalence for 27 Sites in the Adult
Population in 2008.” International Journal of Cancer
132: 1133–45.
Brenner, H., J. Change-Claude, C. M. Seiler, A. Rickert, and
M. Hoffmeister. 2011. “Protection from Colorectal Cancer
after Colonoscopy: A Population-Based, Case-Control
Study.” Annals of Internal Medicine 154: 22–30.
Bressler, B., L. F. Paszat, Z. Chen, D. M. Rothwell, C. Vinden,
and others. 2007. “Rates of New or Missed Colorectal
Cancers after Colonoscopy and Their Risk Factors: A
Population Based Analysis.” Gastroenterology 132: 96–102.
Butterworth, A. S., J. P. T. Higgins, and P. Pharoah. 2006.
“Relative and Absolute Risk of Colorectal Cancer for
Individuals with a Family History: A Meta-Analysis.”
European Journal of Cancer 42: 216–27.

Chan, A. T., and E. L. Giovannucci. 2010. “Primary Prevention
of Colorectal Cancer.” Gastroenterology 138 (6): 2029–43.
Edwards, B. K., E. Ward, B. A. Kohler, C. Eheman, A. G. Zauber,
and others. 2010. “Annual Report to the Nation on the Status
of Cancer, 1975–2006, Featuring Colorectal Cancer Trends
and Impact of Interventions (Risk Factors, Screening, and
Treatment) to Reduce Future Rates.” Cancer 116 (3): 544–73.
Elmunzer, B. J., R. A. Hayward, P. S. Schoenfeld, S. D. Saini,
A. Deshpande, and others. 2012. “Effect of Flexible
Sigmoidoscopy-Based Screening on Incidence and
Mortality of Colorectal Cancer: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis of Randomized Controlled Trials.” PLOS
Medicine 9 (12): 1–9.
Ferlay J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, and
others. 2013. GLOBOCAN 2012 V1.0, Cancer Incidence and
Mortality Worldwide: IARC Cancerbase No. 11 [Internet].
Lyon, France: International Agency for Research on Cancer.
http://globocan.iarc.fr.
Ginsberg, G. M., J. A. Lauer, S. Zelle, S. Baeten, and R. Baltussen.
2012. “Cost Effectiveness of Strategies to Combat Breast,
Cervical, and Colorectal Cancer in Sub-Saharan Africa and
South East Asia: Mathematical Modeling Study.” British
Medical Journal 344: E614.
Ginsberg, G. M., S. S. Lim, J. A. Lauer, B. P. Johns, and
C. R. Sepulveda. 2010. “Prevention, Screening and
Treatment of Colorectal Cancer: A Global and Regional
Generalized Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.” Cost Effectiveness
and Resource Allocation 8: 2–17.
Goss, P. E., B. L. Lee, R. Bidovinac-Cmjevic, K. Strasser-Weippl,
Y. Chavani-Guerra, and others. 2013. “Planning Cancer
Control in Latin America and the Caribbean.” The Lancet
Oncology 14: 391–436.
Greenberg, D., C. Earle, C. H. Fang, A. Eldar-Lissai, and
P. J. Neumann. 2010. “When Is Cancer Care Cost-Effective? A
Systematic Overview of Cost-Utility Analyses in Oncology.”
Journal of the National Cancer Institute 102: 82–88.
Gyrd-Hansen, D., J. Søgaard, and O. Kronborg. 1998.
“Colorectal Cancer Screening: Efficiency and Effectiveness.”
Health Economics 7: 9–20.
Hardcastle, J. D., J. O. Chamberlain, M. H. Robinson,
S. M. Moss, S. S. Amar, and others. 1996. “Randomised
Controlled Trial of Faecal-Occult-Blood Screening for
Colorectal Cancer.” The Lancet 348: 1472–77.
Hoffe, S. E., R. Shridhar, and M. C. Biajioli. 2010. “Radiation
Therapy for Rectal Cancer: Current Status and Future
Directions.” Cancer Control 17: 25–34.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2010.
Handbook of Cancer Prevention, vol. 10, Cervix Cancer
Screening. Lyon, France: IARC Press.
Içli, F., H. Akbulut, S. Bazarbashi, M. A. Kuzu, M. K. Mallath,
and others. 2010. “Modification and Implementation of
NCCN Guidelines on Colon Cancer in the Middle East and
North Africa Region.” Journal of the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network 8 (Suppl. 3): S22–25.
Imperiale, T. F., D. F. Ransohoff, S. H. Itzkowitz, T. R. Levin,
P. Lavin, and others. 2014. “Multitarget Stool DNA Testing
for Colorectal-Cancer Screening.” New England Journal of
Medicine 370 (14): 1287–97.

Imperiale, T. F., D. F. Ransohoff, S. H. Itzkowitz, B. A. Turnbull,
and M. E. Ross. 2004. “Fecal DNA versus Fecal Occult
Blood for Colorectal-Cancer Screening in an Average-Risk
Population.” New England Journal of Medicine 351 (26):
2704–14.
Johnson, C. D., M. H. Chen, A. Y. Tolendano, J. P. Heiken,
A. Dachman, and others. 2008. “Accuracy of CT
Colonography for Detection of Large Adenomas and
Cancers.” New England Journal of Medicine 359: 1207–17.
Johnson, C. M., C. Wei, J. E. Ensor, D. J. Smolenski, C. I. Amos,
and others. 2013. “Meta-Analysis of Colorectal Cancer Risk
Factors.” Cancer Causes and Control 24: 1207–22.
Knudsen, A. B., I. Lansdorp-Vogelaar, C. M. Rutter, J. E. Savarino,
M. Van Ballegooijen, and others. 2010. “Cost-Effectiveness
of Computed Tomographic Colonography Screening for
Colorectal Cancer in the Medicare Population.” Journal of
the National Cancer Institute 102: 1238–52.
Kronborg, O., C. Fenger, J. Olsen, O. D. Jorgensen, and
O. Sondergaard. 1996. “Randomised Study of Screening
for Colorectal Cancer with Faecal-Occult-Blood Test.” The
Lancet 348: 1467–71.
Lambert, R., C. Sauvaget, and R. Sankaranarayanan. 2009.
“Mass Screening for Colorectal Cancer Is Not Justified
in Most Developing Countries.” International Journal of
Circulation 125: 253–56.
Lansdorp-Vogelaar, I., M. Van Ballegooijen, A. G. Zauber,
J. D. F. Habbemaand, and E. J. Kuipers. 2009. “Effect
of Rising Chemotherapy Costs on the Cost Savings of
Colorectal Cancer Screening.” Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 101: 1412–22.
Lee, S. J., W. J. Boscardin, I. Stijacic-Cenzer, J. Conell-Price,
S. O’Brien, and others. 2013. “Time Lag to Benefit
after Screening for Breast and Colorectal Cancer: MetaAnalysis of Survival Data from the United States, Sweden,
United Kingdom, and Denmark.” British Medical Journal
346: E8441.
Leufkens, A. M., M. A. Van Den Bosch, M. S. Van Leeuwen, and
P. D. Siersema. 2011. “Diagnostic Accuracy of Computed
Tomography for Colon Cancer Staging: A Systematic
Review.” Scandinavian Journal of Gastroenterology 46 (7–8):
887–94. doi:10.3109/00365521.2011.574732.
Levin, B., D. A. Lieberman, B. McFarland, K. S. Andrews,
D. Brooks, and others. 2008. “Screening and Surveillance for
the Early Detection of Colorectal Cancer and Adenomatous
Polyps, 2008: A Joint Guideline from the American
Cancer Society, the U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on
Colorectal Cancer, and the American College of Radiology.”
Gastroenterology 134 (5): 1570–95.
Lieberman, D. A., D. K. Rex, S. J. Winawer, F. M. Giardiello,
D. A. Johnson, and others. 2012. “United States MultiSociety Task Force on Colorectal Cancer Guidelines for
Colonoscopy Surveillance after Screening and Polypectomy:
A Consensus Update by the US Multi-Society Task Force
on Colorectal Cancer.” Gastroenterology 143 (3): 844–57.
doi:10.1053/J.Gastro.2012.06.001.
Mandel, J. S., J. H. Bond, T. R. Church, D. C. Snover,
G. M. Bradley, and others. 1993. “Reducing Mortality from
Colorectal Cancer by Screening for Fecal Occult Blood.

Colorectal Cancer

117

Minnesota Colon Cancer Control Study.” New England
Journal of Medicine 328: 1365–71.
Manzur, J. 2013. “Argentinean Perspectives on Cancer Control
in Latin America.” The Lancet Oncology 14: 387–88.
Marks, D. H. 2002. “Visualizing Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 287: 2428–29.
Maule, W. F. 1994. “Screening for Colorectal Cancer by Nurse
Endoscopists.” New England Journal of Medicine 330:
183–87.
Miles, A., J. Cockburn, R. A. Smith, and J. Wardle. 2004.
“A Perspective from Countries Using Organized Screening
Programs.” Cancer 101: 1201–13.
Ng, S. C., and S. H. Wong. 2013. “Colorectal Cancer Screening
in Asia.” British Medical Bulletin 105: 29–42.
Norum, J. 1998. “Prevention of Colorectal Cancer: A CostEffectiveness Approach to a Screening Model Employing
Sigmoidoscopy.” Annals of Oncology 9: 613–18.
Park, S. M., Y. H. Yun, and S. Kwon. 2005. “Feasible Economic
Strategies to Improve Screening Compliance for Colorectal
Cancer in Korea.” World Journal of Gastroenterology 11 (11):
1587–93.
Pickhardt, P. J., J. R. Choi, I. Hwang, J. L. Butler, M. A. Puckett,
and others. 2003. “Computed Tomographic Virtual
Colonoscopy to Screen for Colorectal Neoplasia in
Asymptomatic Adults.” New England Journal of Medicine
349: 2191–200.
Pignone, M., L. Russell, and J. Wagner, eds. 2005. Economic
Models of Colorectal Cancer Screening in Average-Risk Adults.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Pignone, M., S. Saha, R. Hoerger, and J. Mandelblatt. 2002.
“Cost-Effectiveness Analyses of Colorectal Cancer Screening:
A Systematic Review for the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force.” Annals of Internal Medicine 137 (2): 96–104.
Quintero, E., A. Castells, L. Bujanda, J. Cubiella, D. Salas, and
others. 2012. “Colonoscopy versus Fecal Immunochemical
Testing in Colorectal-Cancer Screening.” New England
Journal of Medicine 366: 697–706.
Rabeneck, L., and L. F. Paszat. 2010. “Circumstances in Which
Colonoscopy Misses Cancer.” Frontline Gastroenterology
1: 52–58.
Rabeneck, L., J. M. Tinmouth, L. F. Paszat, N. N.
Baxter, L. D. Marrett, and others. 2014. “Ontario’s
Coloncancercheck: Results from Canada’s First ProvinceWide Colorectal Cancer Screening Program.” Cancer,
Epidemiology, Biomarkers, and Prevention 23: 508–15.
Schoen, R. E., P. F. Pinsky, J. L. Weissfeld, L. A. Yokochi,
T. Church, and others. 2012. “Colorectal-Cancer Incidence
and Mortality with Screening Flexible Sigmoidoscopy.” New
England Journal of Medicine 366: 2345–57.
Sebag-Montefiore, D., R. J. Stephens, R. Steele, J. Monson,
R. Grieve, and others. 2009. “Preoperative Radiotherapy versus Selective Postoperative Chemoradiotherapy in Patients
with Rectal Cancer (MRC CR07 and NCIC-CTG C016): A
Multicentre, Randomised Trial.” The Lancet 373: 811–20.
Segnan, N., P. Armaroli, L. Bonelli, M. Risio, S. Sciallero, and
others. 2011. “Once-Only Sigmoidoscopy in Colorectal
Cancer Screening: Follow-Up Findings of the Italian

118

Cancer

Randomized Controlled Trial—SCORE.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 103 (17): 1310–22.
Segnan, N., J. Patnick, and L. von Karsa, eds. 2010. European
Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Colorectal Cancer
Screening and Diagnosis. Luxembourg: Publications Office
of the European Union.
Sullivan, T., R. Sullivan, and O. M. Ginsburg. “Screening
for Cancer: Considerations in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries.” In Disease Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Towler, B., L. Irwig, P. Glasziou, J. Kewenter, D. Weller, and
others. 1998. “A Systematic Review of the Effects of Screening
for Colorectal Cancer Using the Faecal Occult Blood Test,
Hemoccult.” British Medical Journal 317 (7158): 559–65.
Tsoi, K. K. F., S. S. M. Ng, M. C. M. Leung, and J. J. Y. Sung.
2008. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis on Screening for
Colorectal Neoplasm and Management of Colorectal
Cancer in Asia.” Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics
28: 353–63.
USPSTF (U.S. Preventive Services Task Force). 2008. “Screening
for Colorectal Cancer: U.S. Preventive Services Task Force
Recommendation Statement.” Annals of Internal Medicine
149: 627–37.
van Rossum, L. G., A. F. Van Rijn, R. J. Laheij, M. G. Van
Oijen, P. Fockens, and others. 2008. “Random Comparison
of Guaiac and Immunochemical Fecal Occult Blood
Tests for Colorectal Cancer in a Screening Population.”
Gastroenterology 135: 82–90.
von Karsa, L., T. A. Lignini, J. Patnick, R. Lambert, and
C. Sauvaget. 2010. “The Dimensions of the CRC Problem.”
Best Practice & Research Clinical Gastroenterology
24: 381–96.
Wallace, M. B., J. A. Kemp, F. Meyer, K. Horton, A. Reffel, and
others. 1999. “Screening for Colorectal Cancer with Flexible
Sigmoidoscopy by Nonphysician Endoscopists.” American
Journal of Medicine 107: 214–28.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2001. Macroeconomics
and Health: Investing in Health for Economic Development.
Geneva: WHO.
Whynes, D. K., A. R. Neilson, A. R. Walker, and J. D. Hardcastle.
1998. “Faecal Occult Blood Screening for Colorectal Cancer:
Is It Cost-Effective?” Health Economics 7: 21–29.
Winawer, S. J. 2007. “Colorectal Cancer Screening.” Best Practice
& Research Clinical Gastroenterology 21 (6): 1031–48.
Winawer, S. J., R. H. Fletcher, L. Miller, F. Godlee, M. H. Stolar,
and others. 1997. “Colorectal Cancer Screening:
Clinical Guidelines and Rationale.” Gastroenterology
112: 594–642.
Winawer, S. J., A. G. Zauber, M. N. Ho, M. J. O’Brien,
L. S. Gottlieb, and others. 1993. “Prevention of Colorectal
Cancer by Colonoscopic Polypectomy.” New England
Journal of Medicine 329 (27): 1977–81.
Wong, S. S., A. P. K. Leong, and T. Z. Leong. 2004. “CostEffectiveness Analysis of Colorectal Cancer Screening
Strategies in Singapore: A Dynamic Decision Analytic

Approach.” Studies in Health Technology Information
107 (Pt 1): 104–10.
Woo, P. P. S., J. J. Kim, and G. M. Leung. 2007. “What Is the
Most Cost-Effective Population-Based Cancer Screening
Program for Chinese Women?” Journal of Clinical Oncology
25: 617–24.
World Bank. 2013. World Databank. http://databank
.worldbank.org/data/home.aspx.
Wu, G. H.-M., Y.-M. Wang, A. M.-F. Yen, J.-M. Wong,
H.-C. Lai, and others. 2006. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis

of Colorectal Cancer Screening with Stool DNA Testing
in Intermediate-Incidence Countries.” BMC Cancer
6: 136–48.
Zauber, A. G. 2010. “Cost-Effectiveness of Colonoscopy.”
Gastroenterology Clinics of North America 20: 751–70.
Zauber, A. G., S. J. Winawer, M. J. O’Brien, I. Lansdorp-Vogelaar,
M. Van Ballegooijen, and others. 2012. “Colonoscopic
Polypectomy and Long-Term Prevention of ColorectalCancer Deaths.” New England Journal of Medicine
366: 687–96.

Colorectal Cancer

119

Chapter

7

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and
Middle-Income Countries
Sumit Gupta, Scott C. Howard, Stephen P. Hunger,
Federico G. Antillon, Monika L. Metzger, Trijn Israels,
Mhamed Harif, and Carlos Rodriguez-Galindo

BURDEN OF CHILDHOOD CANCER IN LMICs
In high-income countries (HICs), the annual incidence of childhood cancer is approximately 140 per
1 million children younger than age 15 years, although
estimates vary between and within countries (Parkin
and others 1998). Incidence rates from low- and
middle-income country (LMIC) registries are generally
significantly lower, as annual rates per 1 million children
of 45.6 in Namibia and 64.4 in India, respectively, illustrate (Parkin and others 1998). Some of this variation
may relate to differences in environmental exposures
or to biologic susceptibility. However, deficiencies in
diagnosis and registration likely contribute significantly
to differences in the reported incidence of cancer, both
overall and of particular subtypes, such as acute leukemias (Howard and others 2008).
Incidence data from high-quality cancer registries
with complete population coverage are rare in LMICs. In
2006, only 8 percent of people in Asia and 11 percent in
Sub-Saharan Africa were covered by population-based
cancer registries; when only high-quality registries are
considered, these rates are 4 percent and 1 percent,
respectively (Ferlay and others 2010).
Multiple steps are required for children with cancer
to be included in a registry (figure 7.1). Caregivers must
seek medical attention for symptoms. Primary health

care workers must appropriately refer patients to
third-level centers capable of recognizing and diagnosing pediatric malignancies and then entering data into
cancer registries. Breaks in the chain of events may occur
at any step.
A comparison of leukemia and non-leukemia cancer
incidence rates is instructive. Pediatric leukemia may
present with a variety of nonspecific symptoms, such
as fever, anemia, malaise, or hemorrhage; many of
the symptoms are also associated with infections. Most
non-leukemia cancers present with enlarging masses
more easily recognizable as malignant. Accordingly,
the magnitude of underdiagnosis would be expected to
be greater in leukemia than in non-leukemia cancers;
registry data bear this out. In the most recent global
compilation of pediatric cancer data, leukemia incidence in low-income countries (LICs) averaged 16.4
per million children, far lower than the incidence rate
of 36.5 in middle-income countries (MICs) and 40.9 in
HICs (figure 7.2) (Howard and others 2008). The nonleukemia cancer incidence was broadly similar in all
income groups: 85 in LICs, 70 in MICs, and 89 in HICs
(Howard and others 2008). The underdiagnosis of childhood brain tumors is likely even greater; many regions
report few or no incident cases of pediatric central
nervous system malignancies (Parkin and others 1998).

Corresponding author: Sumit Gupta, Toronto Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada, sumit.gupta@sickkids.ca

121

Figure 7.1 Links in the Chain of Childhood Cancer Diagnosis and Registration with Potential Barriers in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries
Clinical
diagnosis
of cancer
(e.g., detectable
mass)

Recognition of
possible cancer

Arrival to
primary care

Education/beliefs
Symptoms/signs

Education/beliefs
Symptoms/signs
Distance
Transportation
SES
Family support

Trained
personnel
Clinical
infrastructure
Funding

Arrival to
tertiary care

Histologic
diagnosis
of cancer

Registration
in a database

Education/beliefs
Symptoms/signs
Distance
Transportation
SES
Family support

Personnel
(surgery,
oncology,
pathology)
Pathology lab
Funding

Personnel
(data management)
Supportive
administration
Hardware/Software
Funding

Source: © John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced, with permission, from Howard and others 2008; further permission required for reuse.
Note: SES = socioeconomic status.

Figure 7.2 Reported Incidence Rate of Childhood Leukemia and Its Association with 2005 Gross National Income, Selected Economies
60
Costa Rica
Ecuador

55

Hong Kong SAR, China

50

Singapore

Philippines
45

Uruguay
Colombia
Croatia
China
Pakistan
Hungary
Algeria
Peru
Estonia
Vietnam Poland Slovak Republic
Bulgaria
Brazil
Thailand

40

Incidence

35
30
25

Zimbabwe
India

20

United Arab Emirates

Korea, Rep.
Portugal
Slovenia

Canada
Australia

Italy
Spain
New Zealand

Denmark
Sweden
United States
France
United Kingdom
Iceland
Netherlands
Finland

Norway
Switzerland

Japan

Germany
Kuwait

Israel

South Africa

15
Uganda
Nigeria
Papua New Guinea
Namibia
Mali
Malawi

10
5
0

10,000

20,000

30,000

40,000

50,000

60,000

Mean annual per capita gross national income
Source: © John Wiley and Sons. Reproduced, with permission, from Howard and others 2008; further permission required for reuse.
Note: Incidence rates are per 1 million children per year.

Underdiagnosis and underregistration are not
uniform across all segments of the population. In
Jordan and Honduras, higher leukemia incidence rates
are reported in urban compared with rural districts
(Al Sheyyab and others 2003; Metzger and others 2003).

122

Cancer

Comparing Indian cancer registries, the male-to-female
ratio in acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) incidence
ranged from 1.7 per million in Mumbai to 2.6 in Delhi,
compared with 1.3 in Canada during the same time
period (Parkin and others 1998). At least in some cases,

underdiagnosis may affect girls and rural children
disproportionately.
In addition, not only is childhood cancer severely
underrepresented in LMIC cancer registration; only a
proportion of the children who are registered receive
appropriate treatment. From a survey of health care
workers in 10 LMICs, including Bangladesh, the
Philippines, Tanzania, and Vietnam, 15–37 percent of
the expected patients were seen (Ribeiro and others
2008). Including children missed by registries would
lower this percentage even further.
Thus, the approximately 175,000 children diagnosed
with cancer globally every year are likely to represent
a significant underrepresentation of the worldwide
incidence. Expansion of current cancer registries,
improvement in diagnosis and registration, and novel
methodologies are needed to establish the true pediatric
cancer burden (Ferlay and others 2010; Magrath and
others 2013). The International Agency for Research
on Cancer is assembling an updated volume of the
International Incidence of Childhood Cancer, drawn
predominantly from registry data. Comparisons with
previous editions will allow an assessment of progress.

WHY TREAT CHILDHOOD CANCER IN
LMICs?
Epidemiologic Transition
In most HICs, cancer represents the leading cause
of non-accidental death in children older than age
one year (Ellison, Pogany, and Mery 2007; Siegel,
Naishadham, and Jemal 2013). Although infection
accounted for 64 percent of global deaths in the first
five years of life in 2010 (Liu and others 2012), major
shifts in the magnitude and causes of childhood mortality have occurred in many LMICs, especially in
MICs. In Brazil, mortality in children younger than
age five years decreased from 129 per 1,000 live births
in 1970 to 59 per 1,000 in 1990, and to 19 per 1,000 in
2010; cancer now leads the causes of non-accidental
death in that country. Worldwide, 106 countries witnessed accelerated declines in childhood mortality
from 1990 to 2011; about 80 percent of the decline
was from infectious disease control (Lozano and
others 2011). Consequently, noncommunicable causes
represent a greater proportion than before (Liu and
others 2012; Patton and others 2012). Indeed, while
3.2 percent of deaths among children ages 5–14 years
in LICs are estimated to be caused by cancer, the
equivalent figures for LICs and upper-middle-income
countries are 6.0 percent and 18.6 percent, respectively
(Magrath and others 2013).

Ineffectiveness of Prevention and Screening
Most pediatric malignancies are not caused by modifiable
risk factors, and public health campaigns would have
limited impact on decreasing the incidence, although
impact on delayed presentation is possible. Similarly,
population-based screening programs have not been
shown to affect cancer mortality in children (Schilling
and others 2002). Decreasing childhood cancer mortality rates requires early and accurate diagnosis followed
by effective treatment.

Achievability of Cure
In HICs, over 80 percent of children with cancer are
cured of their disease (Ellison, Pogany, and Mery 2007;
Pui and others 2012; Smith and others 2010). Although
cure rates in LMICs are much lower, there are many
examples of successful treatment with less intensive
regimens that can nevertheless cure a significant portion of patients in LMICs. Burkitt lymphoma (BL), the
most common childhood malignancy in many parts of
Sub-Saharan Africa, is cured in 90 percent of cases in
HICs, using intensive regimens and intense and costly
supportive care (Patte and others 2007; Woessmann and
others 2005). However, up to 50 percent of Sub-Saharan
African children with BL are curable with only three to
six doses of single-agent cyclophosphamide and intrathecal therapy (Harif and others 2008).

Spillover Effect from Pediatric to Adult Oncology
In societies in which cancer may be seen as a death
sentence, pediatric oncology offers the opportunity to
demonstrate high cure rates in a manageable number
of patients through the establishment of a defined and
feasible cancer infrastructure. Such success can serve
as powerful encouragement to governments and policy
makers to create and expand programs targeting adults
with cancer, in addition to ensuring that children with
cancer are not neglected in the face of far greater numbers of adult patients.

PLATFORMS FOR CHILDHOOD CANCER
TREATMENT DELIVERY
Dedicated Centers
Childhood cancer treatment requires specialized
diagnostic and therapeutic capabilities, as well as the
ability to manage potential complications. Expensive,
high-technology equipment is not required, however.
Although volume-outcome relationships have not been

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

123

convincingly demonstrated in pediatric oncology, the
dominant paradigm is to manage care through a limited number of treatment centers in which resources
and expertise are concentrated. Satellite centers can
deliver some treatment, decreasing the burden on
families, providing rapid management of complications
and, in LMICs, decreasing abandonment of treatment
(Metzger and others 2003; Pediatric Oncology Group of
Ontario 2012).
Tables 7.1 and 7.2 list the personnel and infrastructural requirements for an ideal LMIC center
delivering pediatric cancer care; however, many institutions in LMICs deliver curative treatment in the
absence of many of these elements (Harif and others
2008; Madani and others 2006; Pedrosa and others
2000). Such treatment must be adapted to local capabilities. For example, centers without an intensive
care unit or ventilators will not be able to deliver as
intensive chemotherapy as ones with these resources,
but they will nonetheless be able to cure a portion
of children.

It is worth highlighting the importance of stable drug
supplies. Shortages of essential chemotherapy agents
have been shown to impact pediatric survival, even in
HICs (Metzger, Billett, and Link 2012). In LMICs, the
impact of inconsistent chemotherapy availability is likely
to be even greater.
In many LMICs, childhood cancer services are
delivered through cancer hospitals serving primarily
adult populations. In these instances, appropriately sized
pediatric equipment and specific pediatric expertise are
still required. Even when these requirements are met,
the neglect of pediatric populations in the face of large
volumes of adult patients may still adversely impact the
quality of childhood cancer care.
Twinning Programs
“Twinning” is currently the most effective model for sustained improvement in childhood cancer care in LMICs.
Twinning programs foster interactions between hospitals
in LMICs and established cancer treatment centers,

Table 7.1 Examples of Essential Personnel for Ideal Pediatric Cancer Care in Low- and Middle-Income
Countriesa
Personnel

Requirements

Medical doctors

Individuals who have received training or have experience managing pediatric oncology patients are essential
to lead the unit and coordinate all other personnel needed to achieve cure. In many centers, pediatricians, adult
hematologists, adult oncologists, or surgeons with some degree of extra training or experience may fill this role.
Training and fellowship programs now exist in several LMICs.

Surgeons

Surgery is necessary for the diagnosis and treatment of many pediatric malignancies, such as Wilms tumor.
However, some cancers are curable without surgical intervention.

Radiation oncologists

Radiation therapy is used for a variety of pediatric malignancies in HICs, such as Hodgkin lymphoma, Wilms
tumor, and sarcomas. However, in some cases, substituting additional chemotherapy or surgery can result in
cure (Mauz-Korholz and others 2010; Nachman and others 2002).

Pathologists

Correct diagnosis is the foundation of cancer care, and a professional who has experience in the diagnosis of
pediatric malignancies and who is connected with disease-specific pathology experts for difficult cases is ideal.

Nursing

Strong nursing support with additional training in safe chemotherapy administration is needed. Expertise in the
recognition and management of complications related to either the malignancy or treatment is desirable. An
open line of communication between nursing and medical colleagues is crucial. Models for training nurses in
pediatric oncology in LMICs have been described (Day and others 2011; Day and others 2012).

Pharmacists

Dedicated pharmacists are needed to prepare chemotherapy and to facilitate the safe preparation, handling, and
disposal of chemotherapeutic medications.

Social workers

Addressing the emotional, social, financial, and spiritual needs of children and families facilitates adherence to
treatment, improves quality of life, and reduces the risk of abandonment.

Dieticians or nutritionists

Nutritional support is particularly important in LMICs where malnutrition at diagnosis or during treatment is
prevalent (Israels and others 2009; Sala and others 2005; Viana and others 2001).

Note: HICs = high-income countries; LMICs = low- and middle-income countries.
a. This list is not meant to be exhaustive. Other personnel, including infectious disease specialists and intensive care physicians, play crucial roles but may not be available in many
resource-constrained settings. All the elements listed are desirable, but a proportion of children will still be cured in their absence.

124

Cancer

Table 7.2 Infrastructure Needed to Deliver Ideal Pediatric Cancer Care in Low- and Middle-Income Countriesa
Infrastructure

Requirements

Inpatient and outpatient beds

Sufficient inpatient and outpatient beds are required, preferably designated for pediatric oncology patients.
A hand hygiene program, isolation capabilities, and other infection control methods are desirable.

Laboratory and pathology
services

Basic hematologic, biochemical, microbiologic, and pathologic laboratory services capable of timely turnaround
are desirable. Although advanced diagnostic modalities, such as flow cytometry and cytogenetics, are available
in HICs, their absence does not preclude the establishment of a pediatric oncology center (Hunger, Sung, and
Howard 2009).

Diagnostic imaging

Basic imaging capabilities are necessary. While advanced modalities—such as computerized tomography and
magnetic resonance imaging—are ideal, basic modalities, such as plain radiographs and ultrasonography are
sufficient to begin treating childhood cancer (Madani and others 2006; Marjerrison and others 2012).

Chemotherapy and supportive
care medications

Reliable supplies of selected chemotherapeutic agents and supportive care medications, such as
antimicrobials, antiemetics, and analgesics, are crucial. The World Health Organization Model List of
Essential Medications for Children provides a starting point for specific medications (WHO 2013).

Blood product availability

Treatment protocols may cause bone marrow suppression, necessitating the timely and reliable delivery of
safe blood products. However, this is not the case for all chemotherapies; treatment for several malignancies
requires minimal transfusion support.

Psychosocial support

Abandonment of therapy is a significant cause of treatment failure in many LMICs. The provision of financial
support in case of inability to pay for medical care, and of transport and accommodation when necessary,
decreases the risk of abandonment and must be considered an essential part of oncology care in LMICs.

Surgical facilities

Surgery is necessary for diagnosis and treatment of many pediatric malignancies, for example, Wilms tumor.
Many cancers are curable without surgical intervention.

Radiation facilities

Radiation therapy is used for a variety of pediatric malignancies in HICs, for example, Hodgkin lymphoma,
Wilms tumor, and sarcomas. However, in some cases, substituting additional chemotherapy or surgery can
result in cure (Mauz-Korholz and others 2010; Nachman and others 2002).

Note: HICs = high-income countries; LMICs = low- and middle-income countries.
a. This list is not meant to be exhaustive. While all of the elements listed are desirable, a proportion of children can still be cured in their absence.

with the goal of improving survival rates among children
with cancer (Ribeiro and Pui 2005). Twinning allows a
bidirectional exchange and combines disease-specific
multidisciplinary expertise with local knowledge and
capabilities.
Twinning programs can involve the flow of financial
resources, although the presence of committed individuals on both sides predicts success better than the
availability of funding. Interactive online tools such
as Cure4Kids (http://www.Cure4Kids.org) facilitate
communication between participating centers (St. Jude
Children’s Research Hospital 2012). In some cases,
twinning programs have been associated with rapid
increases in cure rates (annex map 7A.1). The Pediatric
Oncology in Developing Countries (PODC) committee of the International Society of Pediatric Oncology
(SIOP) has created a forum for interested people
from centers in HICs and LMICs to develop twinning
programs. Indeed, the 12 working groups of PODC are
exclusively dedicated to improving care for children
with cancer in LMICs by fostering twinning programs,

adapting treatment regimens, improving supportive
care, and reducing treatment abandonment.
Despite the success of the twinning paradigm in
improving individual pediatric cancer units, improvements must be translated into national childhood cancer
strategies to have the greatest impact. Most LMICs lack
policies to ensure good pediatric oncology care, and
many have no national cancer plan, let alone one targeting the unique needs of children. Notable exceptions
include Seguro Popular in Mexico, which includes an
accreditation process for hospitals treating children
with cancer, and reimbursement for care provided
by qualifying institutions. Since this program began,
abandonment of treatment has fallen from 52 percent
to 5 percent (Rivera-Luna and others 2012), although
access to care and the survival of treated patients varies
widely among accredited pediatric cancer units (PerezCuevas and others 2013). Current efforts in China to
build comprehensive health insurance programs that
cover childhood cancer treatment hold great promise
but are in their infancy.

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

125

GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF TREATMENT
Importance of Locally Adapted Treatment Protocols
Although not true for all cancers, increasing the intensity of treatment has increased cure rates (Matthay
and others 1999; Womer and others 2012; Woods and
others 1996). Different childhood cancers require different treatment intensities for maximum cure rates;
for example, the chemotherapy for Wilms tumor is far
less intense than for acute myeloid leukemia (AML).
One of the great achievements of pediatric oncology
in recent decades is the refinement of risk stratification
systems, allowing for an assessment of the aggressiveness of a particular child’s cancer and for treatment
intensity to be matched to disease risk, thereby reducing
both undertreatment and overtreatment (Crawford,
MacDonald, and Packer 2007; Maris 2010; Metzger and
Dome 2005; Pui, Robison, and Look 2008).
Avoiding overtreatment is crucial in LMICs, since
it carries with it an increased risk of treatment-related
mortality (TRM), defined as death from complications of
treatment, as opposed to the disease itself (Creutzig and
others 2004; Ethier and others 2011; Gupta and others
2009; Gupta and others 2011; Prucker and others 2009).
At some point, any benefit in disease control of intensifying treatment will be outweighed by an increase in TRM.
Finding the balance point for each malignancy at each
pediatric cancer center is key to optimizing therapy and
curing the maximum number of children possible.
This ideal balance point depends on the malignancy in
question, as well as a particular center’s ability to provide

supportive care to prevent and manage treatment complications. The same high intensity chemotherapy delivered
at two centers, one with 24-hour availability of intensive
care and the other without, will result in higher TRM
rates in the latter. In HICs, advances in supportive care
have allowed the delivery of ever higher intensity treatments. Even in this context, however, the ideal balance
has at times been difficult to find; intensifying treatment
for AML initially resulted in high TRM rates in Europe
and North America, which later decreased as cancer
units developed the new level of supportive care required
(Creutzig and others 2004; Lange and others 2008).
In many LMIC centers, supportive care capabilities
lag behind those in HICs. Transposing treatment protocols designed for HIC levels of supportive care to LMIC
centers is therefore almost certain to cause high levels of
TRM (Gupta and others 2009; Gupta and others 2011).
The possibility of doing more harm than good is significant. An important example is described in box 7.1,
where decreasing treatment intensity actually led to
higher cure rates. Questions to ask when trying to determine the supportive care capabilities of an individual
institution include the following:
• Are 24-hour nursing and medical coverage available
for inpatients?
• How quickly can antibiotics be ordered, received, and
given to patients when urgent treatment is necessary?
• How quickly can a blood transfusion be ordered,
received, and given to patients when urgent treatment
is necessary?

Box 7.1

Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia: Cost and Treatment Intensity
Acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL) is a subtype of acute myeloid leukemia, with cure rates of about
80 percent in high-income countries. In Guangzhou, China, Luo and others (2009b) treated 30 children
with APL between 1999 and 2008. Before September 2004, children were treated on an intensive protocol
including high-dose cytarabine and high cumulative doses of anthracycline. After September 2004, children
were treated with a far less intensive protocol with fewer chemotherapy cycles, lower anthracycline doses, and
no cytarabine. The total cost of therapy was lower, decreasing the financial burden on parents.
With the first protocol, of 16 children, six abandoned therapy and seven developed bacterial sepsis, one of
whom died. With the less intensive protocol, none of the 14 children studied abandoned therapy, and there
was only one episode of sepsis, with no resultant infectious deaths. The three-year, event-free survival was
37.5 percent with the more intense protocol, and 79.6 percent with the less intensive treatment. Although
the number of patients is small, this example illustrates an important principle: increased intensity and cost
of treatment can do more harm than good.
Sources: Ortega and others 2005; Testi and others 2005; Luo and others 2009b.

126

Cancer

• Are basic radiographic, microbiologic, and hematologic diagnostic tests available?
• Is intensive care, including ventilator and inotropic
support, available?
• What is the prevalence of malnutrition in the population? What programs are available in the pediatric
cancer unit to address malnutrition?
• Are families able to reach medical attention quickly in
case of a treatment complication?
• Where do outpatients go when emergencies develop
after hours? Who treats them there? Are pediatric oncology professionals involved in their care after hours?
Further consequences stem from the principle that
increased intensity and cost of treatment can do more
harm than good. Many diagnostic modalities are utilized
to classify the extent of disease, including stage and risk
group, of particular patients. For example, in ALL, the
most common childhood cancer in many countries, flow
cytometry and cytogenetics help to identify high-risk subgroups, such as T-cell or hypodiploid ALL (Pui, Robison,
and Look 2008). Children with these high-risk subgroups
are treated with higher intensity protocols. In a center in
which higher intensity therapy leads to unacceptable TRM
rates, spending limited resources on developing these
diagnostic modalities is difficult to justify. However, making a correct diagnosis (such as distinguishing between
myeloid and lymphoblastic leukemia) is often life-saving
and cost-effective (Howard and others 2005).
Abandonment of Therapy
Abandonment is defined as the “failure to start or complete [potentially] curative treatment” (Mostert and others
2011, 719). The phenomenon of abandonment, virtually
unknown in HICs, is a significant problem in LMICs; in
some contexts, it constitutes the most common cause of
treatment failure (Arora, Eden, and Pizer 2007). The importance of this issue led SIOP to establish the Abandonment
of Treatment Working Group (Mostert and others 2011).
A systematic review of pediatric acute lymphoblastic leukemia in LMICs found that abandonment rates ranged
from 3 percent to an astonishing 74 percent (Gupta and
others 2013). None of 83 published reports of abandonment were from LICs, so the review likely underestimates
the global incidence of abandonment.
Many reasons for abandonment have been cited,
including a lack of financial resources, poor disease
comprehension, cultural factors, belief in alternative
medicines, fear of treatment toxicity, inadequate care on
the part of health care workers, and decreased awareness of aid programs (Bonilla and others 2009; Howard
and others 2004; Kulkarni and Marwaha 2010; Luo and

others 2009a; Mostert and others 2006). Interestingly,
even in the context of a treatment program in which chemotherapy, supportive care, lodging, and transport were
provided at no cost to families, families of low socioeconomic status were still at higher risk of abandonment
(Bonilla and others 2009). Various efforts in LMICs
have decreased abandonment rates, including providing
financial support, adapting treatment protocols based on
a family’s financial resources, providing parental education, and establishing a social work program (box 7.2)
(Bonilla and others 2009; Howard and others 2004; Luo
and others 2008; Mostert and others 2010).
Thus, just as some level of basic supportive care
capacity is necessary to treat children with cancer, basic
educational and aid programs aimed at preventing
abandonment are also imperative.

Outcome Evaluation
Although it is possible to theorize as to what protocol modifications are best suited to a particular
LMIC institution, there is no substitute for the actual

Box 7.2

Examples of Successful Efforts to Decrease
the Abandonment of Therapy in Children
with Cancer
• In Guatemala City, Guatemala, through the establishment
of a psychosocial team including both social workers and
psychologists whose aim is to support families throughout
the cancer experience, abandonment has decreased from
42 to 2 percent (F. Antillon, personal communication).
• In Recife, Brazil, through the provision of lodging,
social work, transportation, and food subsidies, and the
establishment of a parent group, a fundraising foundation, and a patient tracking system, abandonment
among children with acute lymphoblastic leukemia
(ALL) decreased from 16 to 1 percent from 1980 to 2002
(Howard and others 2004).
• In Yogyakarta, Indonesia, after the introduction of a
parental education program, upfront treatment refusal
for children with ALL decreased from 14 to 2 percent
among poor parents (Mostert and others 2010).
Sources: F. Antillon, personal communication; Howard and others 2004; Mostert and
others 2010.

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

127

monitoring of treatment outcomes. Collection of basic
data on patient demographics, disease characteristics,
and treatment outcomes, including cause of death,
allows for evaluation of a specific treatment protocol, as well as the design of future interventions. For
example, it is not enough to know that children with
ALL in an individual center have a mortality rate of
50 percent, without evaluating the causes of death.
If the predominant cause of death was TRM, then
appropriate interventions would include the strengthening of supportive care, perhaps accompanied by
de-intensification of treatment. However, if the predominant cause was relapse, increasing treatment
intensity may be appropriate. Outcome monitoring
allows for the gradual evolution of treatment strategies in a safe and efficient manner and cure of the
maximum number of children possible at each stage
(Hunger, Sung, and Howard 2009).
Health care workers in many LMICs lack the time
to collect, review, and analyze outcome information.
In most settings, a dedicated data manager with sufficient training, infrastructure, and support is needed
to ensure accurate and timely data entry. It is worth
emphasizing that the collection and analysis of these
data are neither academic research nor a luxury. Indeed,
outcome monitoring is essential to improving the care
and outcomes at any pediatric cancer center, whether
in LMICs or HICs. However, quality improvement
efforts in LMICs often mean the difference between life
and death, whereas those in HICs affect more subtle
outcomes.

TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC CANCERS
The ideal malignancy targeted for treatment in LMICs
would be one that accounts for a significant proportion
of the local cancer burden and that is curable with either
simple surgery or short-course chemotherapy alone. The
treatment of this ideal target would involve minimal acute
toxicity and few chronic late effects—survivorship issues
specific to LMIC children are unstudied. Of course, no
single malignancy perfectly fits this profile. Which malignancies should be treated in a particular LMIC center
depends on the local incidence, the available treatment
modalities, the institutional level of supportive care possible, and theoretically attainable cure rates.
A center that is only beginning to treat childhood
cancer could start with malignancies for which cure is
possible with relatively simple and low-intensity chemotherapy, such as BL or Hodgkin lymphoma (HL).
A center that has achieved significant cure rates in
these cancers could then address malignancies requiring

128

Cancer

more complex chemotherapy (for example, ALL) and
multimodality treatment (for example, Wilms tumor)
and could eventually advance to treatment of sarcomas,
brain tumors, and diseases that require high levels of
supportive care (for example, AML, high-risk neuroblastoma). Table 7.3 lists characteristics of 13 of the most
common childhood cancers; this information should be
considered before deciding which malignancies to treat
and which resources to develop in a specific setting. For
each type of cancer, the elements required for successful
treatment may differ based on stage and risk group. For
example, while intensive chemotherapy, surgery, radiation, and autologous stem cell transplantation cure only
a minority of advanced-stage neuroblastoma in older
children, surgery alone may cure localized and biologically favorable neuroblastoma in a younger child.
The subsequent sections discuss five childhood
cancers often targeted by LMIC centers because of
their high potential cure rates with relatively low
intensity treatment regimens. In addition, these five
cancers collectively account for a significant portion
of pediatric malignancies: ALL, HL, Wilms tumor, BL,
and retinoblastoma. Each section outlines aspects of
diagnosis and treatment and how both may be adapted
to local resource constraints.
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia
Stephen P. Hunger1 and Federico G. Antillon2
1
Children’s Hospital Colorado and the Department of
Pediatrics, University of Colorado School of Medicine,
Aurora, CO, United States.
2
Unidad Nacional de Oncología Pediátrica, Guatemala
City, Guatemala.
ALL, a cancer of white blood cells (WBC), is the most
common childhood cancer, accounting for 25 percent
of cancers among those younger than 15 years of age,
and 20 percent of those that occur before 20 years
of age (Ries and others 1999). ALL is universally
fatal without effective therapy. In North America and
Western Europe, five-year survival rates have steadily
improved, from below 10 percent in the 1960s to over
90 percent today (Hunger and others 2012; Moricke
and others 2010; Pui and others 2009; Silverman and
others 2010). However, most children who develop ALL
do not reside in these countries. China and India are
predicted to have four to five times as many pediatric
ALL cases as the United States; Indonesia, Nigeria, and
Pakistan are predicted to have about the same number
of cases as the United States (online annex table 7A.1).
Thus, it is critical to consider how pediatric ALL can
be cured in countries that have very different income

Table 7.3 Characteristics of Childhood Cancers to Consider When Determining Which Malignancies Are Appropriate for
Treatment in a Particular Resource-Constrained Setting
Approximate
HIC cure ratea
(percent)

Approximate
treatment
duration
(months)

Supportive
care level
required

Chemotherapy
necessary?

Surgery
necessary?

Radiation
necessary?

Late
effects/
disability

ALL

90

24–40

++

Yes

No

No

+

AML

60

5–7

++++

Yes

No

No

++

Hodgkin lymphoma

90

2–8

++

Yes

No

Nob

++

Burkitt lymphoma

90

6–8

+++c

Yes

No

No

+

Medulloblastoma

75

8–10

++

Yes

Yes

Yes

++++

Neuroblastoma

65

8–10

+++

Yes

Yes

Yes

+++

Yes

b

No

++

b

Cancer

Wilms tumor

90

4–8

+

Yes

Rhabdomyosarcoma

70

8–12

++

Yes

Yes

No

++

Osteosarcoma

70

8–12

++

Yes

Yes

No

++

b

Ewing sarcoma

75

Retinoblastoma

d

95

8–12
0–3

++

Yes

Yes

No

++

+

e

No

f

Yes

No

++

e

Testicular cancer

90

0–3

+

No

Yes

No

−

Hepatoblastoma

g

4–6

+

Yes

Yes

No

+

85

Note: The scale is from not very significant (−) to very significant (++++). ALL = acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML = acute myeloid leukemia; HIC = high-income country.
a. Unless otherwise specified, HIC cure rates are taken from Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results Program registry data (Smith and others 2010).
b. Radiation is indicated in select cases.
c . While HIC regimens for Burkitt lymphoma require significant supportive care, lower intensity regimens requiring minimal supportive care can also be used.
d. Dimaras and others 2012.
e. Chemotherapy is required for advanced cases, although localized cases may be cured without it.
f . Local control methods, including cryotherapy and laser therapy, are often used instead of surgery in HICs, but these are unavailable in many low- and middle-income countries.
g. Perilongo and others 2009; Zsiros and others 2010.

structures and health care systems than those in North
America and Western Europe.
Diagnosis of ALL
Children with ALL are commonly brought to medical
attention for symptoms caused by ineffective production of normal blood cells because of replacement of
the bone marrow by leukemia, including pallor, bleeding, fever, infections, and bone pain. They may also
have leukemic involvement of other organs, including liver, spleen, mediastinum, central nervous system,
and testicles.
ALL is diagnosed based on review of peripheral blood
cell counts and a bone marrow aspirate/biopsy, tests that
can be performed at most medical facilities. Simple factors predictive of outcome include age (younger is better,
except for infants less than one year) and initial WBC
count (lower is better). More sophisticated and often
very expensive diagnostic tests readily available in HICs
include immunophenotyping, to determine cell lineage,

and cytogenetic or molecular genetic studies, to define
sentinel abnormalities, many of which have important
prognostic implications. However, these tests are often
not available in LMICs. A major prognostic factor is
the rapidity of response to single-agent or multiagent
therapy, which can be measured in a simple and inexpensive manner by peripheral blood or bone marrow
morphology, or in a complicated and expensive manner using advanced flow cytometry and/or molecular
genetic techniques.
General Concepts of Pediatric ALL Treatment
Contemporary treatment for ALL consists of complex combination chemotherapy regimens that
last 2.5–3 years, with six to eight months of relatively intensive therapy, followed by 1.5–2 years of
low-intensity maintenance therapy, during which most
children can resume normal activities and attend school.
Chemotherapy drugs included in these regimens have
been widely available for decades; most are relatively

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

129

inexpensive, with the exception of asparaginase preparations, which are extremely expensive (Masera and others
2004). Radiation therapy to the brain was a critical
component of early effective ALL regimens, but the use
of cranial irradiation has been greatly reduced in most
contemporary HIC regimens (Pui and Howard 2008).
Although treatment of pediatric ALL is associated
with significant risk of short- and long-term side effects,
most children cured of ALL will lead healthy and productive lives. Cure rates are much lower for children with
ALL that relapses, with the chance of cure related to site
of relapse, ALL genetic features, and time between initial
diagnosis and relapse (Nguyen and others 2008).
Because most children with ALL live in LMICs,
efforts have been made to improve treatment available
in those countries through partnerships with centers in
HICs (Masera and others 1998). This twinning has led
to major improvements in ALL survival in LMICs, often
through adoption of intact or modified HIC treatment
regimens (Howard and others 2004; Veerman, Sutaryo,
and Sumadiono 2005). Critical to these successes has
been the transfer of knowledge regarding treatment
regimens, supportive care, and emotional and psychosocial support. Abandonment of care is a major issue
in LMICs because of economic and social pressures on
parents and cultural beliefs that a child has been healed
(Sitaresmi and others 2010; Wang and others 2011).
Innovative programs have been developed to support
patients and families and greatly reduce abandonment;
a Guatemalan program reduced abandonment rates
from 42 percent to less than 2 percent (unpublished
observations, Rivas and Antillon). Successful implementation and improvement of therapies also requires
close tracking of patient characteristics and outcomes,
necessitating access to databases and data management
personnel (Ayoub and others 2007).
Specifics of Pediatric ALL Treatment
The development of large cooperative treatment
groups that conduct clinical trials, which often include
70 percent or more of children with ALL in a given
country (Hunger and others 2012), has been critical to
improvements in survival for pediatric ALL in HICs.
This development has resulted in near-universal access
to effective treatments in most HICs (limited in some
cases because of country-specific differences in health
care financing) and the widespread availability of knowledge about the specifics of effective treatment regimens.
Twinning has provided outstanding examples of very
effective transfer of knowledge and adoption of contemporary treatment regimens in LMICs, such as the
Central American Association of Pediatric Hematology
Oncology (AHOPCA), largely developed through

130

Cancer

collaborations with pediatric cancer programs in Monza
and Milan, Italy, and St. Jude Children’s Research
Hospital in the United States. AHOPCA now conducts
its own non-randomized clinical trials. In Guatemala,
ALL survival rates now range from 50 percent (high-risk)
to 90 percent (low-risk) for different patient subgroups
(Antillon-Klussmann and others 2010). This strategy
is possible in countries with reasonably well-developed
health care systems, with infant mortality rates less than
40–50 per 1,000 live births serving as a good surrogate
marker (online annex, table 7A.1).
However, high rates of ALL TRM can be a major
problem (Gupta and others 2011). Regimens that are
delivered safely with TRM rates less than 5 percent
in North America and Western Europe can be associated with TRM rates 5–10 times higher in LMICs; the
problem is much worse in countries with less developed health care systems, reflected by infant mortality
rates more than 50 per 1,000 live births. High rates
of TRM severely compromise cure rates and can be a
major impediment to program development in LMICs.
Treatment of relapsed ALL has a very low chance of
success in LMICs.
One way to address these problems is through the use
of graduated intensity regimens, whereby centers first
implement less intensive regimens similar to those used
in North America and Western Europe in the 1970s and
1980s, and increase treatment intensity only when they
establish these therapies to be safe and effective in their
local settings (Hunger, Sung, and Howard 2009). This
strategy is attractive because it starts with regimens that
are less costly, less toxic, and do not require sophisticated
diagnostic tests, but that can cure about 50 percent of
children with ALL if TRM can be kept low and abandonment can be minimized.
An example from the pediatric cancer program
in Santo Domingo, the Dominican Republic, shows
the potential benefit of this strategy. In 2005–07,
a relatively intensive HIC-type treatment regimen
was followed for 91 children with ALL; however, it
was associated with excessive TRM. Following this
experience, a less intensive regimen was used to treat
101 patients diagnosed in 2008–10. The less intensive
treatment improved 24-month overall survival from
40 to 70 percent, accompanied by a decrease in TRM
from 29 of 91 cases in the early period to 8 of 101 in
the later period (Hunger and others 2011).
Costs of Pediatric ALL Treatment
Pediatric ALL treatment in North America and Western
Europe is widely recognized to be very expensive and
highly cost effective. A report from the Dutch Childhood
Oncology Group showed mean total costs for treating

pediatric ALL to be US$115,858–US$163,350 per case,
with highly favorable costs per life year saved of
US$1,962–US$2,655 (van Litsenburg and others 2011).
However, effective treatments can be implemented for
much lower costs. Luo and others reported in 2008 that
a reduced intensity, low-cost protocol that obtained a
four-year event-free survival rate of 72.8 percent could
be implemented in Guangzhou, China, for a total hospital cost of US$4,300 per case; the range is from US$3,100
to US$6,800 (Luo and others 2008). More intensive
regimens obtained slightly better results and could be
implemented for US$9,900–US$12,500, similar to the
average cost of US$11,000 per patient reported from
Shanghai, China (Liu and others 2009).
Summary
ALL is the most common pediatric cancer. Five-year
survival rates exceed 90 percent in HICs. Through
twinning, centers in LMICs with infant mortality rates
less than 40–50 per 1,000 live births have attained
cure rates of about 70 percent. Outcomes for relapsed
ALL are much worse, stressing the need for effective
therapy at initial diagnosis. Graduated intensity regimens have the promise to decrease TRM and improve
survival, and they may be particularly effective in
LMICs with infant mortality rates greater than 50 per
1,000 live births.
Hodgkin Lymphoma
Monika L. Metzger1
1
Division of Leukemia/Lymphoma, St. Jude Children’s
Research Hospital, Memphis, TN, United States.
In HICs, over 80 percent of children with HL survive
long-term. In LMICs, survival has been lower because
of lack of adequate staging, drug shortages, inadequate
access to radiotherapy, delays in therapy, and social hardship leading to abandonment of therapy. Most children
with HL in LMICs present to medical attention with
advanced-stage disease and a long history of symptoms.
Despite these obstacles, many LMIC patients can still be
cured with basic chemotherapy, with or without consolidative radiotherapy. HL is curable, diagnosable without
expensive technology, and constitutes an important portion of children with cancer.
Epidemiology and Prognostic Factors
Childhood HL rarely presents before five years of age
in HICs; however, in LMICs it can be seen in children
as young as age one year. In HICs, HL has a bimodal
age distribution in early adulthood and after the age of
50 years. The age distribution is shifted toward younger

ages in LICs, and it often occurs before adolescence.
Furthermore, in LMICs, HL is most often Epstein-Barr
virus-positive and of mixed cellular histology (Siddiqui
and others 2006). Disease stage and bulk, as well as
the presence of “B-symptoms” (fevers, drenching night
sweats, or greater than 10 percent weight loss in the past
six months) are established prognostic factors. Other
potential prognostic factors include the erythrocyte
sedimentation rate and low hemoglobin and albumin
levels, although these may be less reliable indicators in
children suffering from chronic malnutrition or parasitic infections.
Diagnosis of HL
An excisional lymph node biopsy is recommended,
as fine-needle aspirates are often inadequate for diagnosis. This is, in fact, the only surgical procedure
routinely required in the treatment of HL. Pathology
is basic; the diagnosis can be confirmed with a simple hematoxylin and eosin stain without the need for
immunohistochemistry.
Staging and Treatment Options
In HICs, the ideal initial evaluation of children for HL
includes computed tomography of the neck, chest,
abdomen, and pelvis, accompanied by FDG-positron
emission tomography. Staging and the presence of
B-symptoms allow risk stratification with therapy
tailored according to risk of relapse and adapted based
on disease response after two cycles of chemotherapy.
Risk-stratified, response-adapted therapy offers the
potential to maximize cure and minimize toxicity
(Hodgson, Hudson, and Constine 2007).
In LMICs with limited availability of diagnostic
imaging, a thorough physical examination for determination of all pathologic peripheral adenopathy, chest
radiograph for extent of mediastinal involvement, and
ultrasonography for intra-abdominal adenopathy can
be sufficient for staging. Bone marrow biopsy is not
recommended for most patients, since it is expensive,
painful, and rarely affects risk classification or therapy
(Hines-Thomas and others 2010). In some cases, a positive bone marrow biopsy may actually harm the patient
by leading to the false perception that bone marrow
involvement is incurable or that consolidative radiation
therapy is not indicated.
In cases of limited staging evaluation, the treatment approach must account for incomplete ascertainment of affected areas. Accordingly, more weight
must be placed on effective chemotherapy and less on
local control with radiotherapy, which would not be
applied to disease sites undetected by incomplete staging evaluations. Furthermore, radiation therapy is often

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

131

unavailable, inconsistently available, or too toxic when
given by radiation oncologists without pediatric expertise. Risk stratification in many LMICs should also be
broader, similar to early HIC chemotherapy-only trials.
Table 7.4 provides examples of chemotherapy-only and
combined modality treatment regimens used successfully in LMICs.
During HL treatment, the minimum necessary supportive care consists of antibiotics and antiemetics,
blood products are rarely needed, and therapy can be
administered in the outpatient setting without the need
for growth factors.

Costs of HL Treatment
The bulk of the cost of HL therapy is due to pathologic
evaluation, radiation therapy, and diagnostic imaging
studies; chemotherapy and supportive care constitute a
far smaller portion. In a study evaluating the cost of therapy in Sub-Saharan Africa for a child with stage II disease and followed for two years, the total cost was more
than US$6,500 in a continent where the annual gross
domestic product (GDP) per inhabitant is usually less
than US$2,000 (Stefan and Stones 2009). However, these
costs can be significantly reduced by carefully choosing
the minimal necessary diagnostic imaging techniques

Table 7.4 Treatment Results of Pediatric Hodgkin Lymphoma Trials in Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Outcome % (years)
Stagea

Number of patients

Event-free
survival

Disease-free
survival

Overall
survival

CVPP x 3

IA, IIA

10

86 (7)

—

—

CVPP x 6

IB, IIB

16

87 (7)

—

—

COPP x 6

I, IIA

14

100 (3)

—

100 (3)

COPP-ABV x 8–10

IIB, III, IV

34

75 (3)

—

—

COPP/ABV x 6

I–IIA

10

89 (5)

—

—

COPP/ABV x 6

IIB–IVB

43

90 (5)

—

—

All stages

34

—

80 (5)

—

I–IIIA

38

—

75 (5)

—

IIIB–IV

10

—

60 (5)

—

Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy-only regimens
Grupo Argentino de Tratamiento de Leucemia Agudab

c

Nicaragua

Chennai, Indiad

e

New Delhi, India
COPP x 6
Ugandaf
MOPP x 6

Combined modality trials
New Delhi, Indiag
4 ABVD + 25–40 Gy IFRT

I–IIA

79

—

91 (5)

—

6–8 ABVD + 25–40 Gy to bulky disease sites

IIB, III, IV

183

—

73 (5)

—

Note: ABVD = doxorubicin (Adriamycin), bleomycin, vinblastine, dacarbazine; COPP = cyclophosphamide, vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine, prednisone; CVPP = cyclophosphamide,
vincristine, procarbazine, prednisone; IFRT = involved-field radiation therapy; MOPP = mechlorethamine (Mustargen), vincristine (Oncovin), procarbazine, and prednisone;
— = no information available.
a. Stage I represents involvement of a single lymph node region or extralymphatic site. Stage II represents involvement of two or more lymph nodes on the same side of the
diaphragm. Stage III represents involvement of lymph node regions on both sides of the diaphragm. Stage IV represents involvement of extralymphatic organs (for example,
lung). B represents the presence of B symptoms (fever, night sweats, weight loss), while A represents the absence of B symptoms.
b. Sackmann-Muriel and others 1997.
c. Baez and others 1997.
d. Sripada and others 1995.
e. Chandra and others 2008.
f. Olweny and others 1978.
g. Ganesan and others 2011.

132

Cancer

required for staging and chemotherapy regimens that
will permit the omission of radiotherapy. The most
important cost to avoid is that of relapse.
Wilms Tumor
Trijn Israels1
1
Department of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology, VU
University, Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Wilms tumor is relatively common, accounting for
5–7 percent of all childhood cancers (Stiller and Parkin
1996). In many settings, Wilms tumor is the most common malignant abdominal tumor. As treatment programs for pediatric oncology are developed, Wilms tumor
should be one of the first tumors targeted because of its
frequency and curability. Treatment also requires the
development of multidisciplinary capacities that may
benefit other children and programs across the hospital.
Great progress has been made in the treatment
of children with Wilms tumor in recent decades.
The survival rates in HICs now exceed 85 percent.
Multidisciplinary treatment combines surgery and
chemotherapy, with radiotherapy in a selected group
of patients (Graf, Tournade, and de Kraker 2000;
Green 2004). Two treatment strategies have been
used for Wilms tumor worldwide. The first operates
on tumors upfront, as practiced by the Children’s
Oncology Group in North America, followed by
chemotherapy; the second starts with preoperative chemotherapy, as practiced in Europe (SIOP).

Both strategies result in similar long-term survival for
HIC patients (Graf, Tournade, and de Kraker 2000;
Green 2004). Preoperative chemotherapy, however,
reduces surgical complications, such as tumor rupture,
and downstages the tumor at surgery, thereby allowing
for lower intensity, postoperative chemotherapy and
reducing the need for radiotherapy. This is a sensible
strategy for many LMIC patients, who often present
with large tumors in settings where supportive care is
limited and radiotherapy may not be available.
Survival rates in LMICs are lower than in HICs, ranging from 11 percent to 81 percent (Abuidris and others
2008; Israels 2012; Israels and others 2012; Moreira and
others 2012; Wilde and others 2010). Known challenges
are late presentation with advanced disease, malnutrition,
abandonment of treatment, and poor facilities for specific cancer treatment and supportive care (Abuidris and
others 2008; Harif and others 2005; Moreira and others
2012). Capacity building, earlier presentation, a multidisciplinary approach, social support, improved supportive
care, and treatment adapted to local circumstances are key
to improving results (Hadley 2010; Hadley, Rouma, and
Saad-Eldin 2012; Israels and others 2012).
Treatment Settings
The facilities and resources available for the care of children with Wilms tumor vary among centers, but they
can be defined using the following settings (table 7.5):
• Setting 1 is one in which the minimal requirements
for treatment with curative intent are available.

Table 7.5 Classification of Different Settings Providing Care for Children with Wilms Tumora
Setting

Medical facilities

Specialists

Drugs

0

Supportive care

Diagnostic facilities

Pain medication

Physical exam

1. Minimal
requirements for
curative intent

Pediatric ward

Surgeon
(Pediatrician) Nurse

Vincristine
Actinomycin
(Doxorubicin)

Antibiotics
Whole blood
Morphine
Social support

Full blood count
Chest x-ray
Ultrasonography

2. Intermediate

Pediatric
oncology ward
Radiotherapy
Pathology
Multidisciplinary care

Pathologist
Pediatric surgeon
Pediatric oncologist
Radiation oncologist
Oncology nurse

Doxorubicin
Cyclophosphamide
Etoposide Ifosfamide
Carboplatin

All blood products
Central venous access

CT scan

3. State of the art

Intensive care unit

Pediatric pathologist
Pediatric radiation
oncologist Pharmacist
(oncology) Intensivist

Mechanical
ventilation
Hemodialysis
Pressure support

Special stains
Immunohistochemistry
Cytogenetics

Note: CT = computed tomography.
a. Facilities and resources mentioned are in addition to those associated with lower settings. In setting 2, mentioned facilities may or may not be available.

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

133

• Setting 3 is one where all state-of-the-art facilities are
available.
• Setting 2 is in between.
Diagnosis
The diagnosis of Wilms tumor can be made with reasonable certainty based on history, physical examination,
and ultrasonography of the abdomen. The typical presentation of a child with Wilms tumor in low-income
settings is that of a malnourished young child with a
large abdominal or flank mass, who is relatively well
without acute pain or severe general malaise, but with
hematuria and hypertension (Green 2004; Israels 2012).
Ultrasonography of the abdomen is extremely useful to
confirm the diagnosis (De Campo 1986; Hartman and
Sanders 1982; Lowe and others 2000). An x-ray should
be done to detect chest metastases.
In HICs, pathology is useful to confirm the diagnosis and, in addition to stage, to help risk stratify
children and determine postoperative chemotherapy.
In many LMICs, however, the availability of pathologists with pediatric expertise is limited and pathology
results often are available too late to effect clinical
decision making. Other challenges include the appropriate processing of specimens and the availability of
special stains and immunohistochemistry, although
central pathology review or telepathology may be
helpful (Vujanic and others 2009). Fortunately, a diagnosis can often be made with some certainty based on
clinical findings and ultrasonography. Postoperative
chemotherapy can be based on surgical staging, only
if needed.
A diagnostic biopsy before preoperative chemotherapy is not standard practice in current SIOP Wilms
protocols; it is only recommended in LMICs when there
is serious doubt about the diagnosis (Vujanic and others
2003). Such biopsies may result in bleeding, infection, or
tumor spillage with consequent upstaging.
Treatment of Wilms Tumor
Preoperative chemotherapy should be used for children with Wilms tumor in LMICs, even in cases of
small, seemingly easily resectable tumors (Lemerle and
others 1983). Preoperative chemotherapy reduces surgical complications, downstages the tumor, and allows for
less intense postoperative chemotherapy and the potential avoidance of radiotherapy (Graf, Tournade, and de
Kraker 2000). Reliable and continuous access to the chemotherapeutic drugs such as vincristine, actinomycin D,
and doxorubicin is essential.
Radiotherapy is used in patients with advancedstage or unfavorable histology disease in centers with
advanced capabilities. Unfortunately, safe radiotherapy

134

Cancer

for children is often unavailable in developing countries. The recent National Wilms Tumor Study and
SIOP studies have shown that omitting or decreasing
radiation therapy may not compromise cure rates,
but these studies have not been done in children with
very advanced disease or large tumors. Studies from
Morocco and Nicaragua have demonstrated that cure
can be achieved in some patients with advanced disease
without radiotherapy (Baez and others 2002; Madani
and others 2006). Higher cure rates in these populations
may, however, require radiotherapy.
Table 7.6 shows some elements of the therapy used
and the results from selected countries with limited
resources. More detailed treatment recommendations
can be found in a recently published SIOP guideline
developed for use in LMICs (Israels and others 2013).
Cost of Wilms Treatment
To date, cost analyses related to the treatment of children
with Wilms tumor in LMICs have not been reported.
Although of relatively long duration (six months to
two years), treatment is of relatively low intensity and
does not involve expensive chemotherapeutic agents.
The costs of surgery are likely to be high. Social support
enabling parents to complete treatment is very likely to
be cost-effective in LMICs.
Burkitt Lymphoma
Mhamed Harif 1
1
Unité Hématologie et Oncologie Pédiatrique, Centre
d’Oncologie et Hématologie, Centre Hospitalier
Mohammed VI, Marrakech, Morocco.
BL is a mature B-cell neoplasm that arises in lymphoid
tissue, commonly in the jaw or abdomen. Described first
in 1957 by Denis Burkitt in Uganda, it remains the most
common pediatric cancer in malaria-endemic regions of
Sub-Saharan Africa (Burkitt 1958; Lewis and others 2012).
BL invariably arises from chromosomal translocations in
which an oncogene (c-myc) is juxtaposed with genes
encoding immunoglobulins. These translocations lead to
an overexpression of monoclonal surface immunoglobulins in malignant cells, which is important for diagnosing
and distinguishing it from other lymphoid cancers.
Although more than 90 percent of children with BL
in HICs can be cured, doing so requires timely, accurate
diagnosis and risk-directed treatment with high intensity
chemotherapy and well-developed supportive care (Patte
and others 2007). In many LMICs with limited supportive care, delivery of such therapy causes excessive toxic
death; adapted regimens are necessary to cure as many
patients as possible (Hesseling, Israels, and others 2012).

Table 7.6 Reported Outcomes of Patients with Wilms Tumor Treated in Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Settinga

Numbers of
patients

Event-free survival
% (years)

Overall survival
% (years)

Sudanb

1

No

11c

—

Malawid

Preoperative and postoperative,
modified from SIOP protocols

No

46

—

62

Postoperative

Yes

58 (4)

70 (4)

2

374

Postoperative, based on NWTS-4

Yes

59 (3)

74 (3)

Morocco

2

86

Preoperative and postoperative, based
on SIOP protocols

Yes

77 (5)

79 (5)

South Africah

2 (−3)

188

Preoperative and postoperative, based
on SIOP protocols

Yes

75 (5)

81 (5)

Turkeyi

2 (−3)

327

Preoperative and postoperative, based
on SIOP protocols

Yes

56 (10)

61 (10)

Chemotherapy

Radiotherapy

37

Generally postoperative, based
on NWTS-5, 37 percent received
preoperative chemotherapy based on
specific indications

1

84

Egypt, Arab Rep.e

2

f

Central America
g

Country or region

Note: NWTS = National Wilms Tumor Study; SIOP = International Society of Pediatric Oncology; — = not available.
a. Setting 1 is one in which the minimal requirements for treatment with curative intent are available. Setting 3 is one where all state-of-the-art facilities are available; Setting 2 is in between.
b. Abuidris and others 2008.
c. 89 percent of children in this study abandoned therapy prior to the completion of therapy.
d. Israels and others 2012.
e. Abd El-Aal, Habib, and Mishrif 2005.
f. Ortiz and others 2012.
g. Madani and others 2006.
h. Davidson and others 2006.
i. Kutluk and others 2006.

Nevertheless, in even the most resource-constrained
environment, a simplified protocol for patients with BL
can cure 50 percent (Hesseling and others 2009). Indeed,
treatment of BL is likely to be highly cost-effective in all
settings (Bhakta and others 2012).
Diagnosis
Suspected BL is a medical emergency. BL is the fastest
growing human malignancy, in some cases doubling
its volume every 24 hours. The risks of tumor lysis syndrome (TLS)—a collection of metabolic derangements
caused by the rapid turnover of malignant cells, disease
progression, nutritional deterioration, and concomitant
infection—make diagnosis and therapy critical. Indeed,
any child from an endemic region presenting with
massive facial swelling or an abdominal mass requires
immediate physical and laboratory evaluation for any of
these complications.
Biopsy of the suspected tumor is recommended
for diagnosis, but extensive surgery is contraindicated.
The top priority must always be to make a diagnosis
in the fastest, least invasive way possible and to initiate
therapy rapidly. In rare cases, BL cells may be seen in the
peripheral blood, as in Burkitt leukemia, obviating the

need for a biopsy. A fine-needle aspiration may be sufficient in patients whose clinical features are consistent
with BL (Razack and others 2011). When possible, the
presence of mature B-cell markers (for example, CD20,
immunoglobulin) and proliferative markers, such as
Ki67, should be verified to differentiate BL from other
small, round, blue cell tumors.
In cases in which the diagnosis is very likely and
pathologic confirmation will be delayed, chemotherapy with cyclophosphamide, vincristine, and prednisone (COP) may be initiated empirically in potentially
life-threatening situations. These agents have low toxicity and are active for most lymphomas. The benefits
of prompt therapy initiation greatly outweigh the risks,
as delayed therapy can lead to metabolic complications
such as TLS that can be rapidly fatal.
Staging Evaluations and Risk Stratification
Staging evaluations in HICs includes a detailed physical
examination to document peripheral adenopathy and
testicular involvement; computed tomography imaging of the neck, chest, abdomen, and pelvis to define
all sites of adenopathy; and the evaluation of cerebrospinal fluid, bone marrow aspirates, and biopsies.

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

135

Ideally, lumbar punctures are delayed until a diagnosis
is made, so that intrathecal therapy can be administered
at the time of the diagnostic puncture. The Murphy
(St. Jude) staging system is most commonly used to
classify the extent of disease (Murphy 1978). In LMICs,
a physical examination, chest radiograph, abdominal ultrasound, bone marrow aspiration, and lumbar
puncture may provide sufficient staging information
(Marjerrison and others 2012).
Disease risk assignment, and thus treatment intensity,
is determined mainly by disease stage. Lactate dehydrogenase level indicates disease activity and affects risk
group assignment in some, but not all, HIC protocols.
Inadequate response to treatment, defined in HICs as
less than 20 percent reduction in tumor size after the initial chemotherapy cycle or residual cancer after the first
intense blocks of therapy, require intensification of therapy. Different definitions of inadequate response have
been used in resource-constrained settings (Hesseling,
Israels, and others 2012). In either case, the dimensions
of all masses must be documented at presentation.
Treatment
The optimal treatment regimen for a particular patient
depends on disease stage, as well as the environment
of care. Families with high socioeconomic status, good
transportation, and proximity to a pediatric cancer unit
with excellent infrastructure and supportive care can be
treated on an HIC regimen, including intensive- and

short-duration therapy with vincristine, cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin, cytarabine, high-dose methotrexate, and intrathecal agents. Duration and intensity
vary according to risk group, but overall the therapy
produces a 90 percent cure rate (Patte and others 2007).
However, this treatment approach in settings with limited supportive care exposes patients to high rates of
mortality and abandonment.
In LMICs and even in very poor settings, it has
been shown that at least 50 percent of children with BL
and up to 70 percent of children with localized stage
I or stage II disease can be cured with intravenous or
oral cyclophosphamide in combination with intrathecal
methotrexate (Harif and others 2008; Hesseling and
others 2009; Traore and others 2011). Treatment with
simplified regimens is feasible everywhere and should
always be attempted (table 7.7).
In all cases, optimizing supportive care includes the
prevention and treatment of TLS, infection, and vomiting.
TLS is the most common cause of early death in patients
with BL (Howard, Jones, and Pui 2011). Aggressively
hydrating (three liters/m2/day), frequently monitoring
urine output and serum chemistry values, and controlling
uric acid with rasburicase (where available) or allopurinol
can prevent acute kidney injury in most cases. Nutritional
support and the prompt diagnosis and treatment of febrile
neutropenia and mucositis are the mainstays of supportive care after the first week. Family education, written
care pathways, and creative nutritional supplements can

Table 7.7 Selected Cohorts and Outcomes of Children with Burkitt Lymphoma Treated in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries with Locally Adapted Protocols of Lower Intensity
Study

Countries

Subgroups

Number of patients

Hesseling, Njume,
and others 2012

Cameroon

Stages I and II

18

EFS 94

Stage III, clinical remission, or
residual abdominal < 30 mL

58

EFS 76

Stage IV, no clinical remission, or
residual abdominal mass > 30 mL

45

EFS 40

Ngoma and
others 2012

Tanzania, Kenya, Nigeria

All stages

326

EFS 52; OS 62a

Traore and
others 2011

Burkina Faso, Cameroon, Côte
d’Ivoire, Madagascar, Mali,
Senegal

Stage I

19

EFS 44

Stage II

23

EFS 49

Stage III

128

EFS 30

Stage IV

6

EFS 17

Note: EFS = event-free survival; OS = overall survival.
a. No significant differences according to stage.

136

Outcome (percent)

Cancer

produce remarkable results, even in LMICs (Gavidia and
others 2012; Israels and others 2009).
Relapses are usually seen during the first six months
and are rare after one year. Follow-up after one year
focuses on identifying late toxicities and assisting with
reintegration into society. In LMICs, recruiting survivors to improve community awareness of pediatric
cancer care and the possibility of cure is essential.
More detailed treatment recommendations can be
found in a published SIOP guideline developed for use
in LMICs (Hesseling, Israels, and others 2012).
Costs of BL Treatment
As in other pediatric malignancies, data on the costeffectiveness of treatment are rare. Given that a small
number of doses of cyclophosphomide, a relatively inexpensive drug, can cure a significant portion of children,
the treatment of BL is likely to be highly cost-effective.
A paper using data from Malawi demonstrated that
using the World Health Organization (WHO) definition, treatment costs under US$14,243 per case would be
considered very cost-effective (Bhakta and others 2012).
Actual estimated costs of treatment per case, at US$50,
were far lower, although this figure only accounted for
the costs of chemotherapy and is likely an underestimate.
Retinoblastoma
Carlos Rodriguez-Galindo1
1
Dana-Farber/Children’s Hospital Cancer Center,
Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA, United States.
Retinoblastoma is the most frequent neoplasm of the eye
in childhood, representing 2.5–4 percent of all pediatric
cancers and 11 percent of cancers in the first year of life.
Retinoblastoma presents in two distinct clinical forms.
• Bilateral or multifocal (25 percent of cases) is hereditary, characterized by the presence of germline mutations of the RB1 gene. Multifocal retinoblastoma may
be inherited from an affected survivor or be the result
of a new germline mutation.
• Unilateral retinoblastoma (75 percent) is almost always
nonhereditary. Retinoblastoma is a cancer of the very
young; two-thirds of the cases are diagnosed before age
two years, and 90 percent of the cases are diagnosed
before age five years (Ries and others 1999).
Epidemiology
The incidence of retinoblastoma in the United States and
Europe is 2–5 per million children (approximately one
in 14,000–18,000 live births). However, the incidence
is not consistent around the world, appearing higher

(6–10 per million) in India, Sub-Saharan Africa, and
among children of Native American descent in North
America (Stiller and Parkin 1996). Whether this variation is because of ethnic or socioeconomic factors is
unknown, although an environmental role has been
suggested (de Camargo and others 2011; FajardoGutierrez and others 2007). An estimated 8,000 children
develop retinoblastoma each year worldwide. This
burden is unequally distributed, with the majority
of children living in LMICs; these settings witness
90 percent of metastatic cases and virtually all cases of
abandonment (Chantada and others 2011).
Prevention and Early Detection
As with virtually all childhood cancers, retinoblastoma
is not amenable to primary prevention. However,
identification of the hereditary forms and proper
counseling of these patients and their families is key to
limiting the incidence and burden of retinoblastoma
in those relatives.
The successful management of retinoblastoma
depends on the ability to detect the disease while it is still
intraocular. Disease stage correlates with delay in diagnosis; growth and invasion occur in sequence, with extension
beyond the retina occurring only once the tumor has
reached large intraocular dimensions. In HICs, retinoblastoma typically presents while still intraocular; in LMICs,
60–90 percent of children present with extraocular tumor.
Poverty, limited health care access, poor education, and
other aspects of low socioeconomic status are factors in
delayed diagnosis and underdiagnosis in LMICs. The true
magnitude of the problem is difficult to ascertain, given
the paucity of population-based cancer registries.
Conversely, retinoblastoma educational and public
awareness campaigns have been shown to increase referrals, decrease rates of advanced disease, and improve
outcomes in LMICs (Leander and others 2007; RodriguezGalindo and others 2008). Also critical is the ability of the
first health care contact to identify the problem and make
the appropriate referrals. A lack of knowledge on the
part of frontline health care workers has been shown to
be a significant barrier, highlighting the importance of
targeting educational initiatives to primary health care
providers (Leal-Leal and others 2011).
Diagnosis and Staging
The diagnosis of intraocular retinoblastoma does not
require pathologic confirmation. An examination under
anesthesia with a maximally dilated pupil and scleral
indentation is required to examine the entire retina.
Additional imaging studies, including bi-dimensional
ultrasound, computerized tomography, and magnetic
resonance imaging, are desirable but not necessary to

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

137

evaluate extraocular extension and to differentiate retinoblastoma from other causes of leukocoria.
The staging of retinoblastoma reflects the sequential
nature of its progression, beginning with extension into
the ocular coats (choroids and sclera) and optic nerve.
Loco-regional dissemination occurs by direct extension
into the orbital contents and pre-auricular lymph nodes.
Extraorbital disease manifests as both intracranial dissemination and hematogenous metastases to bones,
bone marrow, and liver. Patients are accordingly staged
as having intraocular, orbital, or extraorbital disease
(Chantada and others 2006).
For patients with intraocular retinoblastoma, dedicated staging of the eye is performed to guide treatment
modalities. This classification system is based on tumor
size and location within the eye, as well as the extent of
tumor seeding within the vitreous cavity and subretinal
space, all of which must be documented on the initial
exam under anesthesia. An evaluation for the presence
of metastatic disease (bone scintigraphy, bone marrow
aspirates and biopsies, lumbar puncture) should be
considered in patients presenting with intraocular retinoblastoma with specific high-risk features (RodriguezGalindo and others 2007a).
Treatment
The treatment goal is to save life and preserve vision;
accordingly, treatment is individualized according to the
unilaterality or bilaterality of the disease, potential for
vision, and disease stage. In HICs, more than 90 percent
of children present with intraocular disease; clinical and
research programs aim to improve ocular salvage and
preserve vision. Although surgical removal of the eye
(enucleation) is commonly performed for patients with
advanced intraocular unilateral disease, more conservative approaches are followed for children with bilateral
and early unilateral disease. Modalities include systemic
or intra-arterial chemotherapy, as well as intensive focal
treatments, such as laser thermotherapy and cryotherapy (Gobin and others 2011; Rodriguez-Galindo and
others 2007b).
Orbital radiation therapy is used when the preceding
methods fail. For patients undergoing upfront enucleation, chemotherapy is only used in the presence of highrisk features, which in HICs occurs in 20–25 percent of
cases (Rodriguez-Galindo and others 2007b). In general,
the outcome for children with retinoblastoma in HICs
is excellent, with survival rates in excess of 95 percent.
Many of the modalities discussed require state-of-the-art
equipment and expertise that are unavailable in most
LMIC settings. Thus, for LMIC patients presenting with
orbital disease, the use of chemotherapy, enucleation, and
radiation therapy may offer the best chances of cure.

138

Cancer

Patients presenting with metastatic disease are not
curable with standard therapies in any setting; patients
without central nervous system spread may benefit from
intensive chemotherapy and consolidation with highdose chemotherapy and autologous stem cell rescue
(Dunkel and others 2010; Rodriguez-Galindo and others
2007b). In children in LMICs presenting with advanced
extraocular retinoblastoma, measures to decrease suffering and improve quality of life may be most appropriate.
Low-dose oral chemotherapy and radiation therapy may
result in temporary symptom control.
More detailed treatment recommendations can be
found in a published SIOP guideline developed for use
in LMICs (Chantada and others 2013).
Costs of Retinoblastoma Treatment
Little is known about the cost-effectiveness of retinoblastoma treatment, but measures targeting early
diagnosis are likely key. Failures in public awareness
and deficiencies in education among frontline health
care providers represent major barriers in early diagnosis and result in the high incidence of metastatic
disease and mortality rates in LMICs (Chantada and
others 2011). In LMICs, children with retinoblastoma
are usually diagnosed with advanced intraocular disease; by the time leukocoria is obvious, the tumor may
fill more than 50 percent of the globe, complicating
ocular salvage. Delayed diagnosis remains an issue in
HICs and LMICs, although with consequences on a different scale. As retinoblastoma is a cancer of the infant
and young child, initiatives targeting early recognition
during standard health supervision visits and immunizations should facilitate diagnosis, decrease disease
and treatment burdens and costs, and increase survival
(Rodriguez-Galindo 2011).

COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF TREATING
CHILDHOOD CANCER
Financial objections are often raised to the treatment
of childhood cancer in resource-constrained settings;
policy makers and lay persons may assume that any
such treatment is prohibitively expensive. However, this
assumption is often unsupported.
Indeed, preliminary evidence suggests that treating
childhood cancer may be highly cost-effective. Standard
WHO methodology defines cost-effectiveness as the
ratio of the cost required to avert one disability-adjusted
life year to the annual per capita GDP of the area
(WHO 2003). Ratios of 3:1 are considered cost-effective,
while ratios of 1:1 are considered very cost-effective.
Bhakta and others found that the amount that

could be spent on a single case and still remain under
the very cost-effective threshold was US$257,000
for ALL in Brazil and US$14,243 for BL in Malawi
(Bhakta and others 2012). Although treatments costing
these theoretical thresholds may still be unachievable
for many LMICs, Bhakta and others also found that
these cancers could be treated for a fraction of the
threshold values: US$16,400 and less than US$50,
respectively. Table 7.8 and figure 7.3 illustrate
cost-effective thresholds for several malignancies in
various countries and compare them with actual
costs, when available. These figures, however, do not
account for the initial expenditures associated with
developing new pediatric oncology treatment centers,
such as the initial training of personnel or acquisition
of infrastructure. Further data on theoretical costeffectiveness thresholds and real costs are needed to aid
LMIC policy makers.

Discussions of cost and cost-effectiveness in pediatric
oncology should consider three additional factors.
• First, adapted treatment regimens of lower intensity
can cure a significant proportion of children, with
further increases in intensity delivering real, but
diminishing, gains. This observation suggests that
in most LMICs, an initial modest commitment of
funds to childhood cancer will result in a dramatic
increase in survival, although further improvements
will require significant additional resources.
• Second, traditional cost-effective models assume
a finite resource pool; funding one intervention
requires cutting another. This zero-sum assumption may not be applicable to childhood cancer.
In multiple LMICs, largely through the efforts
of nongovernmental organizations, private funds
that otherwise may have remained outside the

Table 7.8 Comparison of Cost-Effectiveness Thresholds among Common Childhood Cancers, Selected Countries
Threshold

Brazil

Malawi

El Salvador

El Salvador

China

Brazil

United States

Brazil

Morocco

Type of pediatric
cancer

ALL

BL

SR-ALL

HR-ALL

ALL

ALL

ALL

BL

Wilms

Source

Howard
and others
2004

Hesseling
and others
2009

Bonilla and
others 2010

Bonilla and
others 2010

Tang and
others
2008

Brandalise
and others
2010

Pui and others
2009

Sandlund
and others
1997

Madani and
others 2006

Event-free
survival definition

5-year

1-year

5-year

5-year

5-year

5-year

5-year

5-year

5-year

Percentage
abandoning
treatmenta

1

—

—

—

48.3

—

—

—

—

Percentage
event-free
survivalb

63

48

56.3

48.6

38.5

83.6

85.6

39

56.0

Gross domestic
product per
capita

$11,900

$900

$7,600

$7,600

$8,500

$11,900

$49,000

$11,900

$5,100

Life expectancy

72.79

52.31

73.69

73.69

74.84

72.79

78.49

72.79

76.11

Age at diagnosis

5.4

6.9

4.6

7.1

4.7

5.3

5.3

5.5

3

Upper limit
of very costeffective (US$
per patient)

257,075

14,243

147,756

129,037

58,620

344,385

1,454,695

167,146

100,285

Upper limit of
cost-effective
(US$ per patient)

771,225

42,729

443,268

387,112

175,859

1,033,156

4,364,086

501,438

300,855

Source: Bhakta and others 2012.
Note: ALL = acute lymphoblastic leukemia; BL = Burkitt lymphoma; HR-ALL = high-risk ALL; SR-ALL = standard-risk acute lymphoblastic leukemia; — = not available.
a. When no abandonment percentage is listed, the authors included abandonment as an event when calculating event-free survival.
b. In all studies cited, relapse and abandonment were included as events when calculating event-free survival.

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

139

Figure 7.3 Cost-Effective Thresholds Compared with Actual
Costs in Selected Pediatric Malignancies

society may well hold resonance for governments,
policy makers, health care workers, and the general
public.

10,000,000

CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS

100,000

Although the advances in pediatric oncology in HICs
have not been fully realized in most LMICs, significant
progress has been achieved in some pediatric cancer
units. The challenge remains to extend this progress to
all cancer centers in LMICs and to close the survival gap.
The following steps are key prerequisites:

US$

1,000,000

10,000
1,000
100

do

lva

El

Sa

M

or

oc

co

W

M

ala
wi
ilm BL
rs
st
t
El
um
Sa and
or
lva ard
-r
do
r h isk
igh AL
-ri L
sk
Ch ALL
ina
AL
Br L
az
il B
Br Bra L
az
z
il A il A
LL LL
(R
ec
if
US e)
A
AL
L

10

Cost-effective threshold (3:1)

Drug costs onlya

Very cost-effective threshold (1:1)

Actual costb

Gross domestic product per capita
Source: © BMJ Publishing Group Ltd. Reproduced, with permission, from Bhakta and
others 2012; further permission required for reuse.
Note: ALL = acute lymphoblastic leukemia; BL = Burkitt lymphoma; US$= U.S. dollars.
a. Costs only include chemotherapy and supportive care medications, such as
antibiotics and antipyretics.
b. Includes total costs for the entire treatment. Not included are the costs of lost
economic productivity, associated infrastructure and personnel costs, or indirect costs
to parents, such as transportation, accommodation, and food.

health system have instead been allocated to pediatric oncology centers. The success of Unidad
Nacional de Oncología Pediátrica (UNOP) in
Guatemala provides an example of how multiple
sectors can be mobilized, creating a positive-sum
scenario. An initial outlay of funds to UNOP
through a twinning program was leveraged into
additional resources from government and private
donors. The creation of an independent fundraising organization (Fundación Ayúdame a Vivir,
http://ayuvi.org.gt) was essential to this outcome.
Figure 7A.1 in the online annex illustrates the
results of this process.
• Finally, determining whether resources should be
allocated to the treatment of childhood cancer may
be more complex than simple analyses of cost and
cost-effectiveness. Arguments pertaining to justice,
equity, and the non-monetary value of children to

140

Cancer

• The development of national childhood cancer strategies is needed to move beyond the twinning paradigm and to increase cure rates for entire populations.
Lobbying of governments by clinicians and parent
groups is required, as are strengthening links between
childhood cancer advocates in HICs and LMICs.
• To better inform governments and health officials,
further research into the cost and cost-effectiveness
of treatment is necessary. Without such data, the
misconception of childhood cancer treatment as
unaffordable will persist.
• The outcomes of children with cancer should be
monitored by individual treatment centers using data
entry systems. These data should be used continually
to evaluate and modify the local implementation of
therapeutic interventions. Governments can encourage this process through national childhood cancer
strategies that include high-quality pediatric registries.
• Further research is needed into how to effectively
treat various different childhood malignancies in settings of different resource constraints. Studies identifying how to prevent common causes of treatment
failure in LMICs should be conducted.
• The formation of cooperative groups of LMIC centers should be encouraged as forums for protocol
evaluation and advocacy; AHOPCA, the FrenchAfrican Pediatric Oncology Group, and the Brazilian
Childhood Cooperative Group for ALL Treatment are
three excellent examples. Collaborations with HIC
cooperative groups may aid this process.
Pediatric oncology treatment can create a cohort
of cancer survivors in LMICs while building cancer
management capacity and galvanizing cancer advocacy
efforts more generally. Closing the pediatric oncology
survival gap will help not only the more than 150,000
children in LMICs who develop cancer every year; it will
also have long-lasting benefits for the societies to which
they belong.

NOTE
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as follows,
based on estimates of gross national income per capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries: US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries:
• Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income: US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries: US$12,746 or more

REFERENCES
Abd El-Aal, H. H., E. E. Habib, and M. M. Mishrif. 2005.
“Wilms’ Tumor: The Experience of the Pediatric Unit of
Kasr El-Aini Center of Radiation Oncology and Nuclear
Medicine (NEMROCK).” Journal of the Eyptian National
Cancer Institute 17: 308–14.
Abuidris, D. O., M. E. Elimam, F. M. Nugud, E. M. Eligali,
M. E. Ahmed, and others. 2008. “Wilms Tumour in Sudan.”
Pediatric Blood & Cancer 50: 1135–37.
Al Sheyyab, M., A. Bateiha, S. E. Kayed, and B. Hajjawi. 2003. “The
Incidence of Childhood Cancer in Jordan: A PopulationBased Study.” Annals of Saudi Medicine 23: 260–63.
Antillon, F., F. Baez, J. C. Barrantes Zamorra, L. C. Fu, B. Moreno,
and others. 2005. “AMOR: A Proposed Cooperative Effort
to Improve Outcomes of Childhood Cancer in Central
America.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 45 (2): 107–10.
Antillon-Klussmann, F., P. Valverde, C. Garrido, M. Castellanos,
P. De Alarcon, and others. 2010. (abstract). “Treatment
of Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in Limited Income
Country: The Experience of the Unidad Nacional de
Oncologis Pediatrica (UNOP) of Guatemala.” Pediatric
Blood & Cancer 55: 861.
Arora, R. S., T. Eden, and B. Pizer. 2007. “The Problem of
Treatment Abandonment in Children from Developing
Countries with Cancer.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 49:
941–46.
Ayoub, L., L. Fu, A. Pena, J. M. Sierra, P. C. Dominguez, and
others. 2007. “Implementation of a Data Management
Program in a Pediatric Cancer Unit in a Low Income
Country.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 49 (1): 23–27.
doi:10.1002/pbc.20966.
Baez, F., B. F. Fossati, E. Ocampo, V. Conter, A. Flores, and
others. 2002. “Treatment of Childhood Wilms’ Tumor
without Radiotherapy in Nicaragua.” Annals of Oncology
13: 944–48.
Baez, F., E. Ocampo, V. Conter, A. Flores, T. Gutierrez, and
others. 1997. “Treatment of Childhood Hodgkin’s Disease
with COPP or COPP-ABV (Hybrid) without Radiotherapy
in Nicaragua.” Annals of Oncology 8: 247–50.
Bhakta, N., A. L. C. Martiniuk, S. Gupta, and S. C. Howard.
2012. “The Cost-Effectiveness of Treating Paediatric Cancer
in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries: A CaseStudy Approach Using Acute Lymphocytic Leukaemia in
Brazil and Burkitt Lymphoma in Malawi.” Archives of Disease
in Childhood. doi:10.1136/archdischild-2011-301419.

Bonilla, M., S. Gupta, R. Vasquez, S. L. Fuentes, G. deReyes, and
others. 2010. “Predictors of Outcome and Methodological
Issues in Children with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in
El Salvador.” European Journal of Cancer 46 (18): 3280–86.
Bonilla, M., N. Rossell, C. Salaverria, S. Gupta, R. Barr, and
others. 2009. “Prevalence and Predictors of Abandonment
of Therapy among Children with Cancer in El Salvador.”
International Journal of Cancer 125 (9): 2144–46.
Brandalise, S. R., V. R. Pinheiro, S. S. Aguiar, E. I. Matsuda,
R. Otubo, and others. 2010. “Benefits of the Intermittent
Use of 6-Mercaptopurine and Methotrexate in Maintenance
Treatment for Low-Risk Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in
Children: Randomized Trial from the Brazilian Childhood
Cooperative Group: Protocol ALL-99.” Journal of Clinical
Oncology 28: 1911–18.
Burkitt, D. 1958. “A Sarcoma Involving the Jaws of African
Children.” British Journal of Surgery 46: 218–23.
Chandra, J., R. Naithani, V. Singh, Y. K. Saxena, M. Sharma,
and others. 2008. “Developing Anticancer Chemotherapy
Services in a Developing Country: Hodgkin Lymphoma
Experience.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 51: 485–88.
Chantada, G., F. Doz, C. B. Antoneli, R. Grundy, F. F. Clare
Stannard, and others. 2006. “A Proposal for an International
Retinoblastoma Staging System.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer
47 (6): 801–05.
Chantada, G., S. Luna-Fineman, R. S. Sitorus, M. Kruger,
T. Israels, and others. 2013. “SIOP-PODC Recommendations
for Graduated-Intensity Treatment of Retinoblastoma in
Developing Countries.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 60 (5):
719–27.
Chantada, G. L., I. Qaddoumi, S. Canturk, V. Khetan, Z. Ma,
and others. 2011. “Strategies to Manage Retinoblastoma in
Developing Countries.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 56 (3):
341–48.
Crawford, J. R., T. J. Macdonald, and R. J. Packer. 2007.
“Medulloblastoma in Childhood: New Biological Advances.”
The Lancet Neurology 6 (12): 1073–85.
Creutzig, U., M. Zimmermann, D. Reinhardt, M. Dworzak,
J. Stary, and others. 2004. “Early Deaths and TreatmentRelated Mortality in Children Undergoing Therapy for
Acute Myeloid Leukemia: Analysis of the Multicenter
Clinical Trials AML-BFM 93 and AML-BFM 98.” Journal of
Clinical Oncology 22 (21): 4384–93.
Davidson, A., P. Hartley, F. Desai, J. Daubenton, H. Rode,
and others. 2006. “Wilms Tumour Experience in a South
African Centre.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 46: 465–71.
Day, S. W., J. Garcia, F. Antillon, J. A. Wilimas, L. M. Mckeon,
and others. 2012. “A Sustainable Model for Pediatric
Oncology Nursing Education in Low-Income Countries.”
Pediatric Blood & Cancer 58: 163–66.
Day, S. W., L. Segovia, P. Viveros, A. Banfi, G. K. Rivera, and
others. 2011. “Development of the Latin American Centre
for Pediatric Oncology Nursing Education.” Pediatric Blood
& Cancer 56: 5–6.
de Camargo, B., J. de Oliveira Ferreira, R. de Souza Reis,
S. Ferman, M. de Oliveira Santos, and others. 2011.
“Socioeconomic Status and the Incidence of Non-Central

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

141

Nervous System Childhood Embryonic Tumours in Brazil.”
BMC Cancer 11: 160.
De Campo, J. F. 1986. “Ultrasound of Wilms’ Tumor.” Pediatric
Radiology 16: 21–24.
Dimaras, H., K. Kimani, E. A. O. Dimba, P. Gronsdahl,
A. White, and others. 2012. “Retinoblastoma.” The Lancet
379 (9824): 1436–46.
Dunkel, I. J., H. S. L. Chan, R. Jubran, G. L. Chantada,
S. Goldman, and others. 2010. “High-Dose Chemotherapy
with Autologous Hematopoietic Stem Cell Rescue for
Stage 4B Retinoblastoma.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 55 (1):
149–52.
Ellison, L. F., L. Pogany, and L. S. Mery. 2007. “Childhood and
Adolescent Cancer Survival: A Period Analysis of Data from
the Canadian Cancer Registry.” European Journal of Cancer
43: 1967–75.
Ethier, M-C., E. Blanco, T. Lehrnbecher, and L. Sung. 2011.
“Lack of Clarity in the Definition of Treatment-Related
Mortality: Pediatric Acute Leukemia and Adult Acute
Promyelocytic Leukemia as Examples.” Blood 118: 5080–83.
Fajardo-Gutierrez, A., S. Juarez-Ocana, G. GonzalezMiranda, V. Palma-Padilla, R. Carreon-Cruz, and others.
2007. “Incidence of Cancer in Children Residing in Ten
Jurisdictions of the Mexican Republic: Importance of the
Cancer Registry (A Population-Based Study).” BMC Cancer
19 (7): 68.
Ferlay, J., H. R. Shin, F. Bray, D. Forman, C. Mathers, and
others. 2010. “Estimates of Worldwide Burden of Cancer in
2008: GLOBOCAN 2008.” International Journal of Cancer
127: 2893–917.
Ganesan, P., L. Kumar, V. Raina, A. Sharma, S. Bakhshi,
and others. 2011. “Hodgkin’s Lymphoma—Long Term
Outcome: An Experience from a Tertiary Care Cancer
Center in North India.” Annals of Hematology 90: 1153–60.
Gavidia, R., S. L. Fuentes, R. Vasquez, M. Bonilla, M-C. Ethier,
and others. 2012. “Low Socioeconomic Status Is Associated
with Prolonged Times to Assessment and Treatment, Sepsis
and Infectious Death in Pediatric Fever in El Salvador.” Plos
One 7 (8): E43639.
Gobin, Y., I. J. Dunkel, B. P. Marr, S. E. Brodie, and
D. H. Abramson. 2011. “Intra-Arterial Chemotherapy for
the Management of Retinoblastoma: Four-Year Experience.”
Archives of Ophthalmology 129 (6): 732–37.
Graf, N., M. F. Tournade, and J. de Kraker. 2000. “The Role of
Preoperative Chemotherapy in the Management of Wilms’
Tumor: The SIOP Studies.” International Society of Pediatric
Oncology. Urologic Clinics of North America 27: 443–54.
Green, D. M. 2004. “The Treatment of Stages I–IV Favorable
Histology Wilms’ Tumor.” Journal of Clinical Oncology
22: 1366–72.
Gupta, S., F. A. Antillon, M. Bonilla, L. Fu, S. C. Howard, and
others. 2011. “Treatment-Related Mortality in Children
with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in Central America.”
Cancer 117: 4788–95.
Gupta, S., M. Bonilla, S. L. Fuentes, M. Caniza, S. C. Howard,
and others. 2009. “Incidence and Predictors of TreatmentRelated Mortality in Paediatric Acute Leukaemia in El
Salvador.” British Journal of Cancer 100 (7): 1026–31.

142

Cancer

Gupta, S., S. Yeh, A. Martiniuk, C. G. Lam, H. Y. Chen,
and others. 2013. “The Magnitude and Predictors of
Abandonment of Therapy in Pediatric Acute Leukemia in
Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review and MetaAnalysis.” European Journal of Cancer 49: 2555–64.
Hadley, G. P. 2010. “Can Surgeons Fill the Void in the
Management of Children with Solid Tumours in NotDeveloping Countries?” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 55: 16–17.
Hadley, L. G., B. S. Rouma, and Y. Saad-Eldin. 2012. “Challenge
of Pediatric Oncology in Africa.” Seminars in Pediatric
Surgery 21: 136–41.
Harif, M., S. Barsaoui, S. Benchekroun, L. Boccon-Gibod,
R. Bouhas, and others. 2005. “Treatment of Childhood
Cancer in Africa: Preliminary Results of the French-African
Paediatric Oncology Group.” Archives de Pediatrie 12: 851–53.
Harif, M., S. Barsaoui, S. Benchekroun, R. Bouhas, P. Doumbe,
and others. 2008. “Treatment of B-Cell Lymphoma with
LMB Modified Protocols in Africa: Report of the FrenchAfrican Pediatric Oncology Group (GFAOP).” Pediatric
Blood & Cancer 50: 1138–42.
Hartman, D. S., and R. C. Sanders. 1982. “Wilms’ Tumor
versus Neuroblastoma: Usefulness of Ultrasound in
Differentiation.” Journal of Ultrasound in Medicine 1:
117–22.
Hesseling, P., T. Israels, M. Harif, G. Chantada, and E. Molyneux.
2012. “Practical Recommendations for the Management
of Children with Endemic Burkitt Lymphoma (BL) in a
Resource Limited Setting.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 60 (3):
357–62. doi:10.1002/Pbc.24407.
Hesseling, P., E. Molyneux, S. Kamiza, T. Israels, and
R. Broadhead. 2009. “Endemic Burkitt Lymphoma:
A 28-Day Treatment Schedule with Cyclophosphamide and
Intrathecal Methotrexate.” Annals of Tropical Paediatrics
29 (1): 29–34.
Hesseling, P., E. Njume, F. Kouya, T. Katayi, P. Wharin,
and others. 2012. “The Cameroon 2008 Burkitt
Lymphoma Protocol: Improved Event-Free Survival with
Treatment Adapted to Disease Stage and the Response to
Induction Therapy.” Pediatric Hematology and Oncology
29 (2): 119–29.
Hines-Thomas, M. R., S. C. Howard, M. M. Hudson,
M. J. Krasin, S. C. Kaste, and others. 2010. “Utility of
Bone Marrow Biopsy at Diagnosis in Pediatric Hodgkin’s
Lymphoma.” Haematologica 95: 1691–96.
Hodgson, D. C., M. M. Hudson, and L. S. Constine. 2007.
“Pediatric Hodgkin Lymphoma: Maximizing Efficacy and
Minimizing Toxicity.” Seminars in Radiation Oncology 17:
230–42.
Howard, S. C., D. Campana, E. Coustan-Smith, F. Antillon,
M. Bonilla, and others. 2005. “Development of a Regional
Flow Cytometry Center for Diagnosis of Childhood
Leukemia in Central America.” Leukemia 19: 323–25.
Howard, S. C., D. P. Jones, and C. H. Pui. 2011. “The Tumor
Lysis Syndrome.” New England Journal of Medicine 364:
1844–54.
Howard, S. C., M. L. Metzger, J. A. Wilimas, Y. Quintana, C. H. Pui,
and others. 2008. “Childhood Cancer Epidemiology in
Low-Income Countries.” Cancer 112: 461–72.

Howard, S. C., M. Pedrosa, M. Lins, A. Pedrosa, C. H. Pui,
and others. 2004. “Establishment of a Pediatric Oncology
Program and Outcomes of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia in a Resource-Poor Area.” Journal of the American
Medical Association 291 (20): 2471–75.
Hunger, S. P., X. Lu, M. Devidas, B. M. Camitta, P. S. Gaynon,
N. J. Winick, and others. 2012. “Improved Survival for
Children and Adolescents with Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia between 1990 and 2005: A Report from the
Children’s Oncology Group.” Journal of Clinical Oncology
30 (14): 1663–69.
Hunger, S. P., D. Reyes, O. Negrin, M. Montero, L. De La Rosa,
and others. 2011. “Decreased Early Mortality and
Increased Survival with Less Intensive Therapy for
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia (ALL) in the Dominican
Republic.” Abstract. Pediatric Blood & Cancer 57: 761.
Hunger, S. P., L. Sung, and S. C. Howard. 2009. “Treatment
Strategies and Regimens of Graduated Intensity for
Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in Low-Income
Countries: A Proposal.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 52 (5):
559–65.
Israels, T. 2012. “Wilms Tumor in Africa: Challenges to Cure.”
Pediatric Blood & Cancer 58: 3–4.
Israels, T., E. Borgstein, M. Jamali, J. de Kraker, H. N. Caron,
and E. M. Molyneux. 2009. “Acute Malnutrition Is Common
in Malawian Patients with a Wilms Tumor: A Role for
Peanut Butter.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 53: 1221–26.
Israels, T., E. Borgstein, D. Pidini, G. Chagaluka, J. de Kraker,
and others. 2012. “Managment of Children with a Wilms
Tumor in Malawi, Sub-Saharan Africa.” Journal of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology 34: 606–10.
Israels, T., C. Moreira, T. Scanlan, E. Molyneux,
S. Kampondeni, and others. 2013. “Clinical Guidelines
for the Management of Children with Wilms Tumour in a
Low Income Setting.” Paediatrics and International Child
Health 60 (1): 5–11.
Kulkarni, K. P., and R. K. Marwaha. 2010. “Pattern and
Implications of Therapy Abandonment in Childhood
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.” Asian Pacific Journal of
Cancer Prevention 11: 1435–36.
Kutluk, T., A. Varan, N. Buyukpamukcu, L. Atahan, M. Caglar,
and others. 2006. “Improved Survival of Children with
Wilms Tumor.” Journal of Pediatric Hematology/Oncology
28: 423–26.
Lange, B. J., F. O. Smith, J. Feusner, D. R. Barnard, P. Dinndorf,
and others. 2008. “Outcomes in CCG-2961: A Children’s
Oncology Group Phase 3 Trial for Untreated Pediatric
Acute Myeloid Leukemia: A Report from the Children’s
Oncology Group.” Blood 111 (3): 1044–53.
Leal-Leal, C., H. Dilliz-Nava, M. Flores-Rojo, and J. Robles-Castro.
2011. “First Contact Physicians and Retinoblastoma in
Mexico.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 57: 1109–12.
Leander, C., L. C. Fu, A. Pena, S. C. Howard, C. RodriguezGalindo, and others. 2007. “Impact of an Education
Program on Late Diagnosis of Retinoblastoma in
Honduras.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 49 (6): 817–19.
Lemerle, J., P. A. Voute, M.-F. Tournade, C. Rodary,
J. F. Delemarre, and others. 1983. “Effectiveness of

Preoperative Chemotherapy in Wilms’ Tumor: Results of
an International Society of Paediatric Oncology (SIOP)
Clinical Trial.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 1: 604–09.
Lewis, N., J. L. Young, P. Hesseling, P. Mccormick, and
N. Wright. 2012. “Epidemiology of Burkitt’s Lymphoma
in Northwest Province, Cameroon, 2003–2010.” Paediatrics
and International Child Health 32 (2): 82–85.
Liu, Y., J. Chen, J. Tang, S. Ni, H. Xue, and others. 2009. “Cost
of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Care in
Shanghai, China.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 53 (4): 557–62.
doi:10.1002/pbc.22127.
Liu, L., H. L. Johnson, S. Cousens, J. Perin, S. Scott, and
others. 2012. “Global, Regional, and National Causes
of Child Mortality: An Updated Systematic Analysis
for 2010 with Time Trends Since 2000.” The Lancet 379
(9832): 2151–61.
Lowe, L. H., B. H. Isuani, R. M. Heller, S. M. Stein, J. E. Johnson,
and others. 2000. “Pediatric Renal Masses: Wilms Tumor
and Beyond.” Radiographics 20: 1585–603.
Lozano, R., H. Wang, K. J. Foreman, J. K. Rajaratnam,
M. Naghavi, and others. 2011. “Progress towards
Millennium Development Goals 4 and 5 on Maternal and
Child Mortality: An Updated Systematic Analysis.” The
Lancet 378 (9797): 1139–65.
Luo, X. Q., Z. Y. Ke, X. Q. Guan, Y. C. Zhang, L. B. Huang,
and others. 2008. “The Comparison of Outcome and Cost
of Three Protocols for Childhood Non-High Risk Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia in China.” Pediatric Blood &
Cancer 51 (2): 204–09.
Luo, X. Q., Z. Y. Ke, L. B. Huang, X. Q. Guan, Y. C. Zhang,
and X. L. Zhang. 2009a. “High-Risk Childhood Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia in China: Factors Influencing the
Treatment and Outcome.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 52 (2):
191–15.
———. 2009b. “Improved Outcome for Chinese Children
with Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia: A Comparison of Two
Protocols.” Pediatric Blood and Cancer 53 (3): 325–28.
Madani, A., S. Zafad, M. Harif, M. Yaakoubi, S. Zamiati, and
others. 2006. “Treatment of Wilms Tumor According to
SIOP 9 Protocol in Casablanca, Morocco.” Pediatric Blood
& Cancer 46 (4): 472–75.
Magrath, I., E. Steliarova-Foucher, E. Sidnei, R. C. Ribeiro,
M. Harif, and others. 2013. “Pediatric Cancer in LowIncome and Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet
Oncology 14: 3104–16.
Maris, J. M. 2010. “Recent Advances in Neuroblastoma.” New
England Journal of Medicine 362: 2202–11.
Marjerrison, S., C. V. Fernandez, V. E. Price, E. Njume, and
P. Hesseling. 2012. “The Use of Ultrasound in Endemic
Burkitt Lymphoma in Cameroon.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer
58 (3): 352–55.
Masera, G., F. Baez, A. Biondi, F. Cavalli, V. Conter, and others.
1998. “North-South Twinning in Paediatric HaematoOncology: The La Mascota Programme, Nicaragua.” The
Lancet 352 (9144): 1923–36. doi:S0140673698070779 [Pii].
Masera, G., T. Eden, M. Schrappe, J. Nachman, H. Gadner,
and others. 2004. “Statement by Members of the Ponte Di
Legno Group on the Right of Children to Have Full Access

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

143

to Essential Treatment for Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia.”
Pediatric Blood & Cancer 43 (2): 13–14. doi:10.1002
/Pbc.20135.
Matthay, K. K., J. G. Villablanca, R. C. Seeger, D. O. Stram,
R. E. Harris, and others. 1999. “Treatment of HighRisk Neuroblastoma with Intensive Chemotherapy,
Radiotherapy, Autologous Bone Marrow Transplantation,
and 13-Cis-Retinoic Acid.” New England Journal of Medicine
341 (16): 1165–73.
Mauz-Korholz, C., D. Hasenclever, W. Dorffel, K. Ruschke,
T. Pelz, and others. 2010. “Procarbazine-Free OEPACOPDAC Chemotherapy in Boys and Standard OPPACOPP in Girls Have Comparable Effectiveness in Pediatric
Hodgkin’s Lymphoma: The GPOH-HD-2002 Study.”
Journal of Clinical Oncology 28 (23): 3680–86.
Metzger, M., A. Billett, and M. P. Link. 2012. “The Impact of
Drug Shortages on Children with Cancer: The Example
of Mechlorethamine.” New England Journal of Medicine
367 (26): 2461–63.
Metzger, M. L., and J. S. Dome. 2005. “Current Therapy for
Wilms’ Tumor.” The Oncologist 10 (10): 815–26.
Metzger, M. L., S. C. Howard, L. C. Fu, A. Pena, R. Stefan, and
others. 2003. “Outcome of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukaemia in Resource-Poor Countries.” The Lancet
362 (9385): 706–08.
Moreira, C., M. N. Nachef, S. Ziamati, Y. Ladjaj, S. Barsaoui,
and others. 2012. “Treatment of Nephroblastoma in
Africa: Results of the First French African Pediatric
Oncology Group (GFAOP) Study.” Pediatric Blood &
Cancer 58 (1): 37–42.
Moricke, A., M. Zimmermann, A. Reiter, G. Henze,
A. Schrauder, and others. 2010. “Long-Term Results of
Five Consecutive Trials in Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia Performed by the ALL-BFM Study Group from
1981 to 2000.” Leukemia 24: 265–84. doi:Leu2009257
[Pii]10.1038/Leu.2009.257.
Mostert, S., R. S. Arora, M. Arreola, P. Bagai, P. Friedrich, and
others. 2011. “Abandonment of Treatment for Childhood
Cancer: Position Statement of a SIOP PODC Working
Group.” The Lancet Oncology 12 (8): 719–20.
Mostert, S., M. N. Sitaresmi, C. M. Gundy, V. Janes, Sutaryo, and
A. J. Veerman. 2010. “Comparing Childhood Leukaemia
Treatment before and after the Introduction of a Parental
Education Programme in Indonesia.” Archives of Disease in
Childhood 95 (1): 20–25.
Mostert, S., M. N. Sitaresmi, C. M. Gundy, Sutaryo, and
A. J. Veerman. 2006. “Influence of Socioeconomic Status on
Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia Treatment in
Indonesia.” Pediatrics 118 (6): E1600–06.
Murphy, S. B. 1978. “Childhood Non-Hodgkin’s Lymphoma.”
New England Journal of Medicine 299: 1446–48.
Nachman, J. B., R. Sposto, P. Herzog, G. S. Gilchrist, S. L. Wolden,
and others. 2002. “Randomized Comparison of Low-Dose
Involved Field Radiotherapy and No Radiotherapy for
Children with Hodgkin’s Disease Who Acheive a Complete
Response to Chemotherapy.” Journal of Clinical Oncology
20 (18): 3765–71.

144

Cancer

Ngoma, T., M. Adde, M. Durosinmi, J. Githang’a, Y. Aken’Ova,
and others. 2012. “Treatment of Burkitt Lymphoma in
Equatorial Africa Using a Simple Three-Drug Combination
Followed by a Salvage Regimen for Patients with Persistent
or Recurrent Disease.” British Journal of Haematology
158 (6): 749–62.
Nguyen, K., M. Devidas, S. C. Cheng, M. La, E. A. Raetz,
and others. 2008. “Factors Influencing Survival after
Relapse from Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia: A Children’s
Oncology Group Study.” Leukemia 22 (12): 2142–50.
doi:Leu2008251 [Pii]10.1038/Leu.2008.251.
Olweny, C. L., E. Katongole-Mbidde, C. Kiire, S. K. Lwanga,
I. Magrath, and others. 1978. “Childhood Hodgkin’s
Disease in Uganda: A Ten Year Experience.” Cancer 42:
787–92.
Ortega, J. J., L. Madero, G. Martin, A. Verdeguer, P. Garcia,
and others. 2005. “Treatment with All-Trans Retinoic
Acid and Anthracycline Monotherapy for Children with
Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia: A Multicentre Study by
the PETHEMA Group.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 23:
7632–40.
Ortiz, R., S. Abad, A. Pena, F. Spreafico, J. Wilimas, and
others. 2012. “Treatment of Wilms Tumor (WT)
within the Central American Association of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology (AHOPCA): Report from
Guatemala, Honduras, El Salvador, and Nicaragua:
Causes of Treatment Failure.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer
59 (6): 971.
Parkin, D. M., E. Kramarova, G. J. Draper, E. Masuyer,
J. Michaelis, and others. 1998. International Incidence of
Childhood Cancer. Vol. II. Lyon, France: International
Agency for Research on Cancer.
Patte, C., A. Auperin, M. Gerrard, J. Michon, R. Pinkerton, and
others. 2007. “Results of the Randomized International
FAB/LMB96 Trial for Intermediate Risk B-Cell NonHodgkin Lymphoma in Children and Adolescents: It Is
Possible to Reduce Treatment for the Early Responding
Patients.” Blood 109 (7): 2773–80.
Patton, G. C., C. Coffey, C. Cappa, D. Currie, L. Riley,
and others. 2012. “Health of the World’s Adolescents:
A Synthesis of Internationally Comparable Data.” The
Lancet 379 (9826): 1665–75.
Pediatric Oncology Group of Ontario. 2012. Provincial
Pediatric Oncology Satellite Program. http://www.pogo.ca
/care/satelliteprograms.
Pedrosa, F., M. Bonilla, A. Liu, K. Smith, D. Davis, and others.
2000. “Effect of Malnutrition at the Time of Diagnosis on
the Survival of Children Treated for Cancer in El Salvador
and Northern Brazil.” Journal of Pediatric Hematology/
Oncology 22 (6): 502–05.
Perez-Cuevas, R., S. V. Doubova, M. Zapata-Tarres, S. FloresHernandez, L. Frazier, and others. 2013. “Scaling Up Cancer
Care for Children without Medical Insurance in Developing
Countries: The Case of Mexico.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer
60: 196–203. doi:10.1002/Pbc.24265.
Perilongo, G., R. Maibach, E. Shafford, L. Brugieres, P. Brock, and
others. 2009. “Cisplatin versus Cisplatin Plus Doxorubicin

for Standard-Risk Hepatoblastoma.” New England Journal
of Medicine 361: 1662–70.
Prucker, C., A. Attarbaschi, C. Peters, M. Dworzak, U. Potschger,
and others. 2009. “Induction Death and Treatment-Related
Mortality in First Remission of Children with Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia: A Population-Based Analysis
of the Austrian Berlin-Frankfurt-Munster Study Group.”
Leukemia 23: 1264–69.
Pui, C. H., D. Campana, D. Pei, W. P. Bowman, J. T. Sandlund,
and others. 2009. “Treating Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia without Cranial Irradiation.” New England
Journal of Medicine 360: 2730–41.
Pui, C. H., and S. C. Howard. 2008. “Current Management and
Challenges of Malignant Disease in the CNS in Paediatric
Leukaemia.” The Lancet Oncology 9 (3): 257–68.
Pui, C. H., D. Pei, A. S. Pappo, S. C. Howard, C. Cheng,
and others. 2012. “Treatment Outcomes in Black and White
Children with Cancer: Results from the SEER Database
and St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, 1992 through
2007.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 30: 2005–12.
Pui, C. H., L. L. Robison, and A. T. Look. 2008. “Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia.” The Lancet 371 (9617):
1030–43.
Razack, R., P. Michelow, G. Leiman, A. Harnekar, J. Poole,
and others. 2011. “An Interinstitutional Review of the
Value of FNAB in Pediatric Oncology in Resource-Limited
Countries.” Diagnostic Cytopathology 40 (9): 770–76.
Ribeiro, R., and C. H. Pui. 2005. “Saving the Children:
Improving Childhood Cancer Treatment in Developing
Countries.” New England Journal of Medicine 352:
2158–60.
Ribeiro, R. C., E. Steliarova-Foucher, I. Magrath, J. Lemerle,
T. Eden, and others. 2008. “Baseline Status of Paediatric
Oncology Care in Ten Low-Income or Mid-Income
Countries Receiving My Child Matters Support:
A Descriptive Study.” The Lancet Oncology 9: 721–29.
Ries, L. A., M. A. Smith, J. G. Gurney, M. Linet, T. Tamra, and
others, editors. 1999. Cancer Incidence and Survival among
Children and Adolescents: United States SEER Program
1975–1995. NIH Pub. No. 99–4649. Bethesda, MD: National
Cancer Institute SEER Program.
Rivera-Luna, R., C. Correa-Gonzalez, E. Altamirano-Alvarez,
F. Sanchez-Zubieta, R. Cardenas-Cardos, and others. 2012.
“Incidence of Childhood Cancer among Mexican Children
Registered under a Public Medical Insurance Program.”
International Journal of Cancer 132: 1646–50. doi:10.1002/
Ijc.27771.
Rodriguez-Galindo, C. 2011. “The Basics of Retinoblastoma:
Back to School.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 57 (7): 1093–94.
doi:10.1002/Pbc.23305.
Rodriguez-Galindo, C., G. Chantada, B. G. Haik, and
M. W. Wilson. 2007a. “Treatment of Retinoblastoma:
Current Status and Future Perspectives.” Current Treatment
Options in Neurology 9 (4): 294–307.
———. 2007b. “Retinoblastoma: Current Treatment and
Future Perspectives.” Current Treatment Options in
Neurology 9 (4): 294–307.

Rodriguez-Galindo, C., M. W. Wilson, G. Chantada, L. Fu,
I. Qaddoumi, and others. 2008. “Retinoblastoma: One
World, One Vision.” Pediatrics 122 (3): E763–70.
Sackmann-Muriel, F., P. Zubizarreta, G. Gallo, M. Socpinaro,
D. Alderete, and others. 1997. “Hodgkin Disease in
Children: Results of a Prospective Randomized Trial in
a Single Institution in Argentina.” Medical and Pediatric
Oncology 29: 544–52.
Sala, A., F. Antillon, P. Pencharz, R. Barr, and others
for the AHOPCA Consortium. 2005. “Nutritional
Status in Children with Cancer: A Report from the
AHOPCA Workshop Held in Guatemala City, August
31–September 5, 2004.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 45:
230–36.
Sandlund, J. T., T. Fonseca, T. Leimig, L. Verissimo,
C. W. Berard, and others. 1997. “Predominance and
Characteristics of Burkitt Lymphoma among Children
with Non-Hodgkin Lymphoma in Northeastern Brazil.”
Leukemia 11 (5): 743–46.
Schilling, F. H., C. Spix, F. Berthold, R. Erttmann, N. Fehse,
and others. 2002. “Neuroblastoma Screening at One Year of
Age.” New England Journal of Medicine 346: 1047–53.
Siddiqui, N., B. Ayub, F. Badar, and A. Zaidi. 2006. “Hodgkin’s
Lymphoma in Pakistan: A Clinico-Epidemiological Study
of 658 Cases at a Cancer Center in Lahore.” Asian Pacific
Journal of Cancer Prevention 7: 651–55.
Siegel, R., D. Naishadham, and A. Jemal. 2013. “Cancer
Statistics, 2013.” CA: A Cancer Journal for Clinicians 63 (1):
11–30.
Silverman, L. B., K. E. Stevenson, J. E. O’Brien, B. L. Asselin,
R. D. Barr, and others. 2010. “Long-Term Results of DanaFarber Cancer Institute ALL Consortium Protocols for
Children with Newly Diagnosed Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia (1985–2000).” Leukemia 24 (2): 320–34.
doi:Leu2009253 [Pii]10.1038/Leu.2009.253.
Sitaresmi, M. N., S. Mostert, R. M. Schook, and A. J. Veerman.
2010. “Treatment Refusal and Abandonment in Childhood
Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in Indonesia: An Analysis
of Causes and Consequences.” Psychooncology 19 (4):
361–67. doi:10.1002/Pon.1578.
Smith, M. A., N. L. Seibel, S. F. Altekruse, L. A. G. Ries,
D. L. Melbert, and others. 2010. “Outcomes for
Children and Adolescents with Cancer: Challenges for the
Twenty-First Century.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 28:
2625–34.
Sripada, P. V., S. G. Tenali, M. Vasudevan, S. Viswanadhan,
D. Sriraman, and others. 1995. “Hybrid (COPP/ABV)
Therapy in Childhood Hodgkin’s Disease: A Study of 53
Cases during 1989–1993 at the Cancer Institute, Madras.”
Pediatric Hematology Oncology 12: 333–41.
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital. 2012. St. Jude Children’s
Research Hospital Cure4Kids: Pediatric Oncology Education.
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital. http://www
.cure4kids.org.
Stefan, D. C., and D. Stones. 2009. “How Much Does It Cost
to Treat Children with Hodgkin Lymhpoma in Africa?”
Leukemia & Lymphoma 50: 196–99.

Treating Childhood Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries

145

Stiller, C. A., and D. M. Parkin. 1996. “Geographic and Ethnic
Variations in the Incidence of Childhood Cancer.” British
Medical Bulletin 52: 682–703.
Tang, Y., X. Xu, H. Song, S. Yang, S. Shi, and others. 2008.
“Long-Term Outcome of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic
Leukemia Treated in China.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer 51:
380–86.
Testi, A. M., A. Biondi, F. L. Coco, M. L. Moleti, F. Giona,
and others. 2005. “GIMEMA-AIEOP AIDA Protocol for
the Treatment of Newly Diagnosed Acute Promyelocytic
Leukemia (APL) in Children.” Blood 106: 447–53.
Traore, F., C. Coze, J.-J. Atteby, N. Andre, C. Moreira, and others.
2011. “Cyclophosphomide Monotherapy in Children with
Burkitt Lymphoma: A Study from the French-African
Pediatric Oncology Group (GFAOP).” Pediatric Blood &
Cancer 56 (1): 70–76.
Van Litsenburg, R. R., C. A. Uyl-De Groot, H. Raat, G. J. Kaspers,
and R. J. Gemke. 2011. “Cost-Effectiveness of Treatment
of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia with
Chemotherapy Only: The Influence of New Medication
and Diagnostic Technology.” Pediatric Blood & Cancer
57 (6): 1005–10. doi:10.1002/Pbc.23197.
Veerman, A. J., Sutaryo, and Sumadiono. 2005. “Twinning:
A Rewarding Scenario for Development of Oncology
Services in Transitional Countries.” Pediatric Blood &
Cancer 45 (2): 103–06. doi:10.1002/Pbc.20390.0.
Viana, M. B., R. A. Fernandes, B. M. De Oliveira, M. Murao,
C. De Andrade Paes, and others. 2001. “Nutritional and
Socio-Economic Status in the Prognosis of Childhood Acute
Lymphoblastic Leukemia.” Haematologica 86 (2): 113–20.
Vujanic, G. M., A. Kelsey, C. Mitchell, R. S. Shannon, and
P. Gornali. 2003. “The Role of Biopsy in the Diagnosis
of Renal Tumors of Childhood: Results of the UKCCSG
Wilms Tumor Study 3.” Medical and Pediatric Oncology 40:
18–22.
Vujanic, G. M., B. Sandstedt, A. Kelsey, and N. J. Sebire.
2009. “Central Pathology Review in Multicenter Trials and
Studies: Lessons from the Nephroblastoma Trials.” Cancer
115: 1977–83.

146

Cancer

Wang, Y. R., R. M. Jin, J. W. Xu, and Z. Q. Zhang. 2011.
“A Report about Treatment Refusal and Abandonment in
Children with Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia in China,
1997–2007.” Leukemia Research 35 (12): 1628–31.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2003. Making Choices in
Health: WHO Guide to Cost-Effectiveness Analysis, edited by
T. Tan-Torres Edejer, R. Baltussen, T. Adam, R. Hutubessy,
A. Acharya, and others. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2013. WHO Model List of Essential Medicines for
Children. WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/medicines
/publications/essentialmedicines/en/index.html.
Wilde, J. C., W. Lameris, E. H. Van Hasselt, E. Molyneux,
H. A. Heij, and others. 2010. “Challenges and Outcome
of Wilms’ Tumour Management in a ResourceConstrained Setting.” African Journal of Paediatric Surgery
7: 159–62.
Woessmann, W., K. Seidemann, G. Mann, M. Zimmermann,
B. Burkhardt, and others. 2005. “The Impact of the
Methotrexate Administration Schedule and Dose
in the Treatment of Children and Adolescents with
B-Cell Neoplasms: A Report of the BFM Group Study
NHL-BFM95.” Blood 105 (3): 948–58.
Womer, R. B., D. C. West, M. D. Krailo, P. S. Dickman,
B. Pawel, and others. 2012. “Randomized Controlled Trial
of Interval-Compressed Chemotherapy for the Treatment
of Localized Ewing Sarcoma: A Report from the Children’s
Oncology Group.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 30 (33):
4148–54.
Woods, W. G., K. Kobrinsky, J. D. Buckley, J. W. Lee, J. Sanders,
and others. 1996. “Time-Sequential Induction Therapy
Improves Postremission Outcome in Acute Myeloid
Leukemia: A Report from the Children’s Cancer Group.”
Blood 87 (12): 4979–89.
Zsiros, J., R. Maibach, E. Shafford, L. Brugieres, P. Brock,
and others. 2010. “Successful Treatment of Childhood
High-Risk Hepatoblastoma with Dose-Intensive
Multiagent Chemotherapy and Surgery: Final Results
of the SIOPEL-3HR Study.” Journal of Clinical Oncology
28 (15): 2584–90.

Chapter

8

Liver Cancer
Hellen Gelband, Chien-Jen Chen, Wendong Chen,
Silvia Franceschi, Sir Andrew Hall, W. Thomas London,
Katherine A. McGlynn, and Christopher P. Wild

INTRODUCTION
Deaths from liver cancer are common, especially in East
Asia and Pacific, South Asia, and parts of Sub-Saharan
Africa, largely as a result of infection decades ago. As the toll
from other cancers is likely to climb in the coming decades,
however, liver cancer incidence and mortality rates should
fall, as generations vaccinated against the hepatitis B virus
(HBV)—the cause of most liver cancers globally—reach
middle and old age. Much still needs to be done and it is
feasible and affordable to hasten the decline. Much can
also be done to address other causes of liver cancer—
including some on the rise, in particular, obesity-related
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFD)—in the coming
years and decades. The latter half of the twentieth century
witnessed the identification of the main causes of liver cancer and deployment of the first cancer prevention vaccine
for humans. All of the risk factors that lead to cirrhosis
cause at least as many noncancer deaths as cancer deaths.
Controlling these risk factors would not only reduce the
incidence of liver cancer; it would also reduce the incidence
of cirrhosis and its other complications, notably, end-stage
liver disease and portal hypertension.

GLOBAL BURDEN OF LIVER CANCER
Primary liver cancer—cancer originating in the liver—is
the sixth most commonly occurring cancer in the world
(782,000 cases in 2012) and the second largest cause of

cancer mortality (746,000 deaths in 2012) (Ferlay and
others 2013). Incidence and mortality rates vary greatly,
mirroring the uneven distribution of major risk factors. In
most high-rate liver cancer areas, the dominant risk factors
are chronic infection with HBV and consumption of foods
contaminated with the mycotoxin aflatoxin B1. In contrast,
in most low-rate areas, the major risk factors are infection with the hepatitis C virus (HCV), excessive alcohol
consumption, obesity, and diabetes. HBV and HCV have
been classified by the International Agency for Research
on Cancer (IARC) as carcinogenic to humans (Group 1).
The most common histologic type of primary liver
cancer, hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC), arises from
the epithelial liver cells known as hepatocytes. Globally,
approximately 80–85 percent of primary liver cancers
are HCCs; the rates of primary liver cancer and rates of
HCC are roughly equivalent. Intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma, which arises from cholangiocytes—epithelial
cells that line the bile duct—is the second most common type of primary liver cancer, but it accounts for
only 10–12 percent of primary liver cancer worldwide.
Infection with liver flukes (flatworms) is a major cause
of cholangiocarcinoma in high-incidence regions.
Incidence and Mortality Rates1
The highest national liver cancer incidence rates in
the world are found in East Asia and Pacific and SubSaharan Africa (maps 8.1 and 8.2). Approximately

Corresponding author: Hellen Gelband, gelband@cddep.org

147

Map 8.1 Age-Standardized Liver Cancer Incidence Rates for Women, 2012
IBRD 41383 | FEBRUARY 2015

Liver Cancer in Women,
0–69 years
ASR (World) Indcidence
Greater than 4.9
2.6 –4.9
1.9–2.6
1.2–1.9
Less than 1.2
No data

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: ASR = age-standardized rate.

Map 8.2 Age-Standardized Liver Cancer Incidence Rates for Men, 2012

Liver Cancer in Men,
0–69 years
ASR (World) Indcidence
Greater than 9.3
5.5–9.3
4–5.5
2.7–4
Fewer than 2.7
No data

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.
Note: ASR = age-standardized rate.

148

Cancer

85 percent of the total liver cancer burden is concentrated in these areas; China alone—because of high
rates and a very large population—bears over half of the
global burden (Ferlay and others 2013). Although more
liver cancers occur in China than any other country, the
country with the highest liver cancer incidence rate in
the world is Mongolia (78.1 per 100,000 population),
with an incidence rate more than three times as high
as that of China (22.3 per 100,000) (Ferlay and others
2013). These exceedingly high rates are reportedly the
result of high rates of infection with HBV, HCV, or both,
as well as co-infection of HBV carriers with hepatitis D
virus (HDV) (Oyunsuren and others 2006).
The prevalence of HBV infection in Mongolia is likely
to decline as the results of a childhood HBV vaccination
program that began in 1991 decrease the prevalence of
new infections. However, the continued high rate of
HCV infection may result in liver cancer incidence rates
increasing for some years (Dondog and others 2011).
Alcohol consumption rates are reportedly higher in
Mongolia than in many Asian populations, a factor that
may contribute to the liver cancer burden (Alcorn 2011).
In addition to China, other East Asian and Pacific
countries and economies with incidence rates greater
than 20 per 100,000 include Taiwan, China; the Republic
of Korea; the Lao People’s Democratic Republic; Thailand;
and Vietnam. Thailand has high rates of both HCC and
intrahepatic cholangiocarcinoma in the northeastern
part of the country, where liver fluke infection is common. Countries in Sub-Saharan Africa with incidence
rates greater than 20 per 100,000 include The Gambia
and Guinea; rates in the Democratic Republic of Congo
(10.6 per 100,000), Ghana (11.1 per 100,000), and GuineaBissau (13.4 per 100,000) are almost as high (Ferlay and
others 2013). Although the reported incidence of liver
cancer in Sub-Saharan Africa is lower than the incidence
in East Asia and Pacific, at least some of the difference
arises from underdiagnosis and the historic paucity of
well-functioning, reliable cancer registries. Another reason for the lower incidence in Sub-Saharan Africa is that
babies are less likely to become infected with HBV in the
perinatal period compared with babies in Asia (Marinier
and others 1985). The later age at infection results in lower
HBV replication rates in Sub-Saharan Africa than in East
Asia and Pacific (Evans and others 1998). Nevertheless,
in both East Asia and Pacific and Sub-Saharan Africa, the
major risk factor for liver cancer is chronic HBV infection.
Notable exceptions are the Arab Republic of Egypt and
Japan, in which HCV is the dominant risk factor.
In contrast to these high-rate areas, rates are low
in North and South America and northern Europe.
Incidence rates in these areas are generally less than
5 per 100,000. Rates are intermediate—typically between

5 per 100,000 and 10 per 100,000—in some countries
of central Europe (for example, Greece and Italy) and
central Asia (for example, Kazakhstan, the Kyrgyz
Republic, Pakistan, and Turkmenistan). Not all lowand middle-income countries (LMICs) have high HBV
infection rates. A prime example is India, which has
historically had low HBV infection rates and, as a result,
low liver cancer incidence rates.
At all incidence levels, almost all countries report rates
in men that are twofold to threefold higher than rates
in women. The greatest gender disparity in incidence,
however, is not reported by countries with the highest
liver cancer rates, such as Mongolia (where the ratio in
men to women is 1.6) (men, 97.8; women, 61.1), but by
countries with intermediate rates, such as France (men,
11.3; women, 2.5) and Spain (men, 9.9; women, 2.4).
An exception to the general predominance in men occurs
in Central America and Mexico, where the rates of both
genders are low and not very different. Although the
reasons for higher rates in men in most regions are not
completely understood, the differences may be partly
explained by the sex-specific prevalence of risk factors.
Men are more likely to be chronically infected with
HBV and HCV, consume alcohol, and smoke cigarettes.
Whether androgenic hormones or increased genetic susceptibility also predispose men to the development of liver
cancer is unclear (Hsieh and others 2007).
Age-Specific Incidence
Liver cancer incidence rates increase with age in all
populations, with the highest rates in those ages
75 years and older. The age-specific curves look somewhat different in various regions, but in no area do the
rates decline among older persons (men and women
combined). In a low-rate area, such as northern
Europe, rates are generally very low before age 40 and
then rise exponentially with age. In high-rate areas
of East Asia and Pacific, rates become elevated in
childhood and continue to rise with age. In contrast, in
the high-rate area of Sub-Saharan Africa, rates increase
until age 55 years and then plateau until age 70 years.
The reasons for the slightly different patterns in Asia
and Sub-Saharan Africa may be related to competing
causes of mortality and differences in mean ages at
HBV infection and/or differences in HBV viral replication patterns (Evans and others 1998).
Incidence by World Bank Economic Group
Globally, the single greatest determinant of liver cancer
prevalence in any country is the prevalence of chronic
HBV infection. As chronic HBV infection has historically

Liver Cancer

149

Figure 8.1 Age-Standardized Liver Cancer Incidence and Mortality Rates
in Men and Women, by World Bank Income Classification, 2012
a. Men

b. Women

Low income
Lower middle income
(except India)
Upper middle income
(except China)
High income
China
India
30

20
10
0
10
20
30
Age-standardized rate (W) per 100,000, 0–69 years
Incidence

Mortality

Source: Ferlay and others 2013.

been much more common in LMICs, liver cancer has
been more prevalent in these countries (figure 8.1). In
general, the incidence rates decrease as a country’s per
capita gross domestic product (GDP) increases. Among
the low-income countries (LICs), 13 of the 34 (38 percent)
have rates of 10 per 100,000 or greater. In the lowermiddle-income group, excluding India, 18 of 49 countries
(37 percent) have rates of 10 per 100,000 or higher. In the
upper-middle-income group, excluding China, only 2 of
55 countries (4 percent) have rates of this magnitude; in
the high-income countries (HICs), only 2 of 75 countries
(3 percent) have rates of 10 per 100,000 or higher.
A rapidly expanding economy does not have an immediate effect on a country’s HBV carrier rate and does not
greatly alter its liver cancer incidence in the short term. For
example, although China has undergone rapid economic
development in the late twentieth century, it still has a
high liver cancer rate. With economic growth, however,
comes the ability to reduce future liver cancer rates by
funding universal HBV vaccination of newborns and aflatoxin abatement programs, ensuring that the blood supply
is free of HCV, and possibly treating HCV infection.
Trends
From 1983–87 through 1998–2002, liver cancer incidence
increased in many areas of the world. Increases were notable in northern Europe, India, Israel, North and South
America, Oceania, and most countries in southern
Europe. In contrast, incidence rates declined in most
eastern Asian countries. Increases in incidence in HICs
and India have been linked to HCV infection, increasing
rates of obesity and diabetes, and improved treatment of
cirrhosis (which reduces the risk of death from cirrhosis,
leaving individuals at persistent risk of HCC).
150

Cancer

Rates have been declining in some eastern Asian
countries for several reasons. In Japan, the large cohort of
individuals infected with HCV in the 1930s and 1940s is
dying off, and the rate of HCV-related HCC is declining
accordingly (Tanaka and others 2002). In China, where
HBV is the dominant risk factor, HBV vaccination of
newborns was introduced in the mid-1980s but ramped
up only after 2000. Vaccine recipients are still too young
to have their rates greatly affect the rates in the overall
population. It is more likely that the rates in China
have declined because exposure to aflatoxin B1 in the diet
has decreased as a result of shifting from a corn-based to
a rice-based diet (Sun and others 2013). The declining
rates of HCC in younger age groups reported in Jiangsu
Province, a high aflatoxin B1 area, support this hypothesis (Chen and others 2006; Wang and others 2010).
Prognosis and DALYs
The prognosis for liver cancer, even in HICs, is unfavorable. In the United States, the one-year survival rate
is less than 50 percent; the five-year survival rate is only
16 percent (NCI 2013). As with all cancers, survival is best
when detected early—for localized liver cancer, five-year
survival is 29 percent, but it falls to 3 percent for cancers
detected late (NCI 2013). Survival is even less favorable
in LMICs. Mortality rates in all locations are roughly
equivalent to incidence rates, and the number of years
lived with disability is very small. Accordingly, disabilityadjusted life years (DALYs) caused by ill health, disability,
or early death from liver cancer are almost identical to
the years of life lost (YLLs) because of liver cancer. The
age-standardized rate of DALYs is highest in the highincidence areas of eastern Asia (744 per 100,000 for men;
277 per 100,000 for women) and western Africa (451 per
100,000 for men; 213 per 100,000 for women); it is lowest
in the low-incidence areas of Europe (110 per 100,000
for men; 45 per 100,000 for women) and North America
(109 per 100,000 for men; 39 per 100,000 for women).
Major Risk Factors
Hepatitis B Virus
An estimated two billion people alive today have been
infected with HBV; about 360 million of these are
chronically infected (carriers) (Dienstag 2008). Routes
of transmission vary by life stage, but HBV is never
spread by air, food, or water. Neonates may be infected
by their mothers, if the mothers are infectious carriers.
During childhood, transmission can occur among children living in close proximity, although the precise route
is unclear. The virus is found in the blood and in most
body secretions. In adult life, the virus can be spread
sexually via semen and vaginal fluid or by contaminated needles, frequently the result of intravenous drug

misuse. Blood transfusion was an important source of
infection before the introduction of donor selection and
serological screening of donated blood.
The natural history of chronic infection is the
development of chronic hepatitis, then cirrhosis, and
finally, liver cancer. However, especially in Sub-Saharan
Africa, cancer can develop without underlying cirrhosis.
Aflatoxin exposure multiplies the risk of liver cancer in
chronic carriers by a factor of twofold to tenfold. The
interval from the initial HBV infection to the development of cancer is in the range of 5–75 years, with most
cases manifesting after several decades. In 1994, IARC
declared HBV a human carcinogen (Group 1).
The age of infection is critically important in determining whether the infection becomes chronic. Newborns
infected by their mothers have an 80–90 percent probability of becoming carriers. Those infected in the first five
years of life beyond the perinatal period have a 20–50
percent probability; those infected in adult life have a
probability of less than 10 percent. This is the inverse of
the risk of developing acute hepatitis, which manifests in
one-third of adult infections with the characteristic fever,
jaundice, and lethargy, whereas it is very unusual following infection in children under age five years.
Acute hepatitis carries a risk of death of 1 percent or
less. Chronic infection increases the risk of primary liver
cancer by tenfold to fiftyfold.
In some populations in the pre-vaccination era, the
prevalence of chronic HBV infection was 10–15 percent
of the adult population. This was the case in China and
surrounding East Asian countries, much of Sub-Saharan
Africa, and the Amazon forest. These high carriage rates
resulted from very high rates of infection in the early
years of life, either perinatally from mothers or in early
childhood from other children (WHO 2004). In China,
some 40 percent of carriers were infected perinatally
by their mothers. In contrast, in Sub-Saharan Africa,
only 10 percent of carriers were infected perinatally and
90 percent were infected through child-to-child transmission during the first few years of life, but overall,
rates were very high. These differences resulted from
the fact that about half of Chinese women who were
HBV-positive remained infectious into adult life, whereas
only 10 percent of HBV-positive African women did so
(Marinier and others 1985).
Rates of liver cancer in Chinese carriers are higher
than in Sub-Saharan African carriers. The reasons for
this are unclear but may be related to the differences in
age at infection.
Hepatitis C Virus
HCV, a blood-borne RNA virus identified in 1988,
was declared a definite human carcinogen by IARC
in 1994. The World Health Organization (WHO)

estimates that about 180 million people, some 3 percent
of the world’s population, are infected with HCV, of
which 130 million are chronic carriers. At least three
million to four million people are newly infected each
year; this compares with the approximately 360 million
people chronically infected with HBV. HCV prevalence
is highest (10 percent or more) in Pakistan (Ahmad
2004), Egypt (Attia 1998), Mongolia (Dondog and
others 2011), and some parts of China (Gao and others
2011). Prevalence is also high in some parts of Italy
(Fusco and others 2008) and Japan (Tanaka and others
2002). Globally, 10 million intravenous drug users are
HCV-positive, with prevalence in this group exceeding
60 percent in most countries (Nelson and others 2011).
HCV transmission is primarily from contaminated
blood or blood products; however, HCV can be acquired
from sexual and household contacts. Acute infection
with HCV is usually asymptomatic; in approximately
75 percent of people, HCV persists as a chronic infection, in which HCV RNA and serum HCV antibodies
(anti-HCV) can be detected in the blood (Alter and
Seeff 2000). Approximately 20 percent of individuals
with chronic HCV will develop HCC by age 75 (Huang
and others 2011).
Evidence suggests that HCV prevalence is substantially underestimated for several reasons:
• Country-specific data are absent, notably in LICs.
• Surveillance systems that focus on acute HCV infection are insensitive because the infection is rarely
symptomatic.
• Prevalence surveys tend to include mainly young adults
(for example, blood donors or pregnant women),
while transmission of HCV through contaminated
blood and needles is more probable in adulthood and
old age than in childhood (Dondog and others 2011).
The seroprevalence of HCV and HBV in cases of HCC
can be used to estimate HCV and HBV prevalence where
accurate population-based data are lacking. In a large
meta-analysis of seroprevalence (Raza and others 2007),
a higher proportion of cases had HBV than HCV in most
countries in East Asia and Pacific, Latin America and
the Caribbean, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa. In
contrast, in most European countries, Japan, the United
States, and, among low-resource countries, Egypt and
Pakistan, HCV was more frequent than HBV (figure 8.2).
The proportion of HCV-associated HCC cases is growing steadily in other countries and economies, for example, Taiwan, China (Lu and others 2006).
HCV epidemics have accompanied the increase in
the availability of injections and blood transfusions
in several countries (Prati 2006). Massive and unsafe
injection campaigns have occurred in many countries,
for example, the anti-schistosomal treatments in Japan
Liver Cancer

151

Figure 8.2 HCV and HBV Presence in HCC Cases: Countries and Economies Where HCV Predominates or Is Increasing
b. Italy
(n = 1,675)

(n = 7,823)
100

90

90

90

80

80

80

70

70

70

60

60

60

20

20

10

10

10

0

0

0

HB

an

Ne

an
e. Pakistan

f. Egypt , Arab Rep.

(n = 9,205)

(n = 779)

(n = 1,811)

90

90

90

80

80

80

70

70

70

60

60

60

0

Bo

at
Ne
g

an
ti-

HB
s

Ne

Bo

i-H
CV
an
t

ive

0

at

0

Ne
g

10

th

10

Bo

10

HC

20

ti-

20

an

20

ive

30

th

30

HC
V

30

Ag

40

ga
tiv
e

40

th

40

V

50

Ag

50

HB
s

50

Percent

100

Percent

100

sA
g

V

sA

e
tiv
ga

Bo

th

V
HC

HB

ti-

sA

e
tiv
ga
Ne

ti-

Bo

HC

V

sA
HB

an

d. Taiwan, China

100

HB

tiv

20

ga

30

Ne

30

th

30

g

40

g

40

th

40

e

50

HC

50

ti-

50

Percent

100

Percent

100

g

Percent

(n = 4,005)

Percent

c. Japan

Bo

a. United States

Source: Adapted from Raza and others 2007.
Note: Includes studies that reported seroprevalence of both hepatitis B surface antigen (HBsAg) and anti-HCV, alone and in combination, for at least 20 hepatocellular carcinoma cases; updated
through 2010. HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus; HCC = hepatocellular carcinoma.

152

Cancer

starting in the 1920s and in Egypt in the 1960s, and the
use of intravenous stimulants starting in Japan in the
1940s (Tanaka and others 2002). Unsafe blood transfusions and medical procedures have tended to increase in
times of military conflicts. By the end of the 1980s, most
chronic transfusion recipients, and virtually all patients
receiving clotting factor concentrates, had been infected
by HCV (Prati 2006). New cases of HCV infection greatly
decreased in high-resource countries in the 1990s after
the introduction of HCV testing for blood donors, inactivation procedures for blood derivatives, and disposable
needles and syringes.
However, HCV-related HCC continued to increase as
those people who were infected decades ago aged. Trends
in HCV prevalence were generally dominated by cohort
effects: an estimated 73 percent of HCV infections
in the United States, for example, involve individuals
born between 1945 and 1965 (Smith and others 2012).
In some low-resource countries, the spread of HCV has
continued and may undermine the future benefits of
HBV immunization (Dondog and others 2011).
Aflatoxins
Aflatoxins are secondary metabolites of the fungal species
Aspergillus flavus and A. parasiticus. These toxins contaminate many staple cereals and oilseeds, with particularly
high levels found on maize (corn) and groundnuts (peanuts) (IARC 2002). Contamination occurs during crop
cultivation and increases postharvest under poor storage
conditions, in which high humidity and temperature promote fungal growth and toxin production. An estimated
4.5 billion people worldwide are exposed to aflatoxins
(Williams and others 2004); the highest exposures are in
LICs in East and Southeast Asia and Sub-Saharan Africa,
where regulatory control is weak.
The naturally occurring aflatoxins are aflatoxins B1, B2,
G1, and G2 (AFB1, AFB2, AFG1, and AFG2, respectively).
AFB1 is the most abundant, toxic, and carcinogenic.
Aflatoxins M1 and M2 (AFM1 and AFM2, respectively),
the hydroxylation products of AFB1 and AFB2, respectively, are found in milk and milk products (IARC 2002).
Aflatoxins induce toxicity and tumors in the liver in a
wide range of animal species. Epidemiological studies in
different populations have established aflatoxins as a risk
factor for HCC (IARC 2002, 2012a). Prospective cohorts
have provided the most convincing evidence, with the
increased risk highest among individuals who were also
chronically infected with HBV (Qian and others 2013;
Wang and others 1996; Wu and others 2009). The effect
of aflatoxins in the absence of chronic HBV infection
is more difficult to assess because of their common
co-occurrence in many populations. Nevertheless, some
studies have reported an increased risk with aflatoxin

exposure among individuals not chronically infected
with HBV (Omer and others 2004; Wu and others
2009). In contrast to aflatoxins and HBV, there has been
little focus on the potential for interaction with HCV.
Knowledge about aflatoxin and risk of liver cirrhosis
is also limited (Kuniholm and others 2008). However,
exposure to aflatoxins in childhood has been linked to
hepatomegaly (enlarged liver) (Gong and others 2012).
Improved understanding of the biochemistry of
aflatoxin-cell interactions strongly supports the association between aflatoxin exposure and liver cancer.
Following bioactivation, AFB1 binds predominantly to
guanine in DNA, leading to a mutation from guanine to
thymine. In HCCs collected from areas where aflatoxin
exposure is high, up to half have been shown to harbor
this type of mutational change in one specific location
within the tumor suppressor gene TP53. This same
mutation is extremely rare in liver tumors from regions
where aflatoxin exposure is low (Wild and Gong 2010).
Based on animal, epidemiological, and mechanistic
data, IARC has classified mixtures of naturally occurring aflatoxins as carcinogenic to humans (Group 1)
(IARC 2002, 2012a). An association between early life
exposure to aflatoxins and impaired child growth has
been reported and may represent a significant additional
disease burden globally (Gong and others 2002, 2004).
Aflatoxin exposure is ubiquitous in many of the
poorest populations worldwide and is a cause of human
liver cancer. Aflatoxins appear to be more potent among
HBV chronic carriers than among noncarriers, but there
may also be an increased risk in the absence of HBV.
Given more than 350 million chronic HBV carriers worldwide, many in areas with endemic aflatoxin consumption,
the need for reduction of aflatoxin exposure is highly relevant for liver cancer prevention. Adverse effects of early
life exposure to aflatoxins add to the public health concerns related to these potent, naturally occurring toxins.
Alcohol
In 1988, IARC classified alcohol as a Group 1 human
carcinogen of the liver, causing HCC (IARC 2012a).
The National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA) has also documented that prolonged heavy
drinking is associated with primary liver cancer (NIAAA
1993), mainly through cirrhosis (Corrao and Arico
2000). The dose-response relationship for the amount
of alcohol consumed and the risk of HCC has been
explored in a meta-analysis (Corrao and others 2004),
which produced a relative risk of liver cirrhosis of 27 and
of HCC of 1.8 for the heaviest drinkers (100 grams daily)
compared with non-drinkers. The incidence of liver cancer increases by 0.7 per 1,000 for every additional drink,
defined as 14.0 grams (0.6 ounces) of pure alcohol by

Liver Cancer

153

NIAAA, regularly consumed per day (Allen and others
2009). Alcohol-associated liver cirrhosis is the most
important risk factor for HCC in populations with low
prevalence of HBV and HCV, as in the United States and
northern Europe (Boffetta and Hashibe 2006). Alcoholrelated HCC without preexisting cirrhosis is rare.
Alcohol is synergistic with tobacco consumption and
chronic viral hepatitis (either HBV or HCV) in causing
HCC (Haenel 1989). Alcohol as a solvent increases
the exposure of hepatocytes to carcinogens such as
4-aminobiphenyl and polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons in tobacco smoke (IARC 2012a). However, alcohol
consumption remains an independent risk factor for
HCC after adjustment for multiple host and viral
factors (Chen, Yu, and Liaw 1997). The risk of developing HBV/HCV-related HCC is about twice as high for
habitual alcohol drinkers as for non-drinkers (Chen and
Chen 2002).
The carcinogenicity of alcoholic beverages does not
seem to vary with the type of beverage; the effect appears
to be caused by ethanol itself. After ingestion, ethanol is
converted by the enzymes alcohol dehydrogenase and
cytochrome P450 2E1 into acetaldehyde, which is oxidized
by aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) to acetate (IARC
2012b). Acetaldehyde is a plausible candidate for the carcinogenic effects of alcoholic drinks through two mechanisms. It forms adducts (bonds) with DNA, leading to
mutations, and it can increase cell proliferation (Boffetta
and Hashibe 2006). Ethanol-caused hepatocellular injury
can result in enhanced fibrogenesis and, finally, cirrhosis.
A deficiency of ALDH—and subsequent inefficient oxidation of acetaldehyde to acetate—substantially increases
the risk of alcohol-related liver cancer.
Liver Flukes
Opisthorchis viverrini and Clonorchis sinensis—liver
flukes—are the strongest risk factors for cholangiocarcinoma, accounting for about 15 percent of liver
cancers globally. O. viverrini was classified by IARC as
a human carcinogen in 1994, and C. sinensis was so
classified in 2009. These small, but not microscopic
(1–2.5 centimeters by 0.3–0.5 centimeter), worms are
prevalent only in parts of eastern Asia, but infection in
some places is extraordinarily common—historically
reaching virtually entire populations in some areas—
and possibly one-sixth of those with chronic infection
develop cholangiocarcinoma, starting in middle age.
The worms, protected in the bile duct, live surprisingly
long lives—up to two decades or more for C. sinensis but
possibly less than 10 years for O. viverrini if untreated
(Sithithaworn and Haswell-Elkins 2003).
O. viverrini infects at least 10 million people in
Lao PDR and Thailand and an unknown number in
Cambodia and Vietnam (Sripa and others 2011). The
154

Cancer

prevalence of infection varies greatly. In Thailand in
1980–81, approximately 35 percent of the population
in the northeast was infected; prevalence in the south
was close to zero. The national average was 14 percent.
By 2001, presumably as a result of treatment and control,
prevalence in the northeast had fallen to 15 percent and
the national average to 10 percent.
The variation in O. viverrini infection in Thailand is
echoed in the variation in mortality rates from cholangiocarcinoma, which varies more than 12-fold from a low
in Prachuap province in the south to a high in Nakhon
Phanom province in the northeast (Sripa and others 2011).
In 2009, IARC estimated that 35 million people were
infected with C. sinensis in China, Korea, Lao PDR,
Thailand, the Russian Federation, and Vietnam (IARC
2009). Infections are occasionally reported in Malaysia
and Singapore. In China, prevalence varies, with the
highest rates in Guangdong (16.4 percent) and Guangxi
(9.8 percent) in southern China and in Korean ethnic
communities in northeastern Heilongjiang province
(4.7 percent) (Shin and others 2010).
The spread of these liver flukes is restricted by the
distribution of the two definitive hosts other than
humans—particular species of snail (mainly of the genus
Bothynia) and cyprinid fish—and the cultural practice of
eating raw fish (either fresh or fermented fish can harbor
fluke metacercariae that infect humans after ingestion).
The transmission cycle also requires eggs from fisheating hosts, which emerge in feces, to contaminate the
freshwater bodies inhabited by the snails and fish—the
consequences of the poor sanitation that is synonymous
with poverty. Other fish-eating mammals, notably dogs
and cats, play some role in maintaining the cycle, but
their part is thought to be relatively unimportant.
Obesity
Obesity is discussed last because it currently is not an
important risk factor in LMICs. However, like other
obesity-related health problems, cirrhosis from NAFD
is on the rise in HICs (Baffy, Brunt, and Caldwell
2012; Michelotti, Machado, and Diehl 2013; Vanni and
Bugianesi 2014). All expectations are that in the coming
decades it will have a similar impact in LMICs. HCC is
the cancer most strongly affected by NAFD.

INTERVENTIONS
Hepatitis B Virus
The major intervention is primary prevention of chronic
infection by vaccination (vaccination has no impact on
established chronic infection). The vaccine consists of
the surface antigen of the virus, an antigen that circulates
in the blood of carriers. The first vaccine was made by

separating this antigen from the blood of carriers and
sterilizing it. Although this plasma-derived vaccine is
still used in some parts of the world, in most places it has
been replaced by recombinant hepatitis B vaccine, which
uses a manufactured surface antigen.
The plasma-derived vaccine first became available in
1982 and initial trials in high-risk populations showed it
to be safe and effective. It has subsequently been introduced in 168 countries as part of the routine childhood
vaccination program. However, this has been a gradual
process over the intervening 30 years. Three doses of the
vaccine are required to ensure protection against acute
hepatitis and chronic infection. These can be given at
intervals of one month. Most countries use a schedule
of doses at two, three, and four months of age, either as
a separate injection or as part of a combination vaccine
with diphtheria, pertussis, and tetanus. Early studies
showed that administration of the vaccine in the first
24 hours of life could prevent transmission from a highly
infectious mother. The recommended WHO schedule is
three or four doses of vaccine, with the initial dose within
24 hours of birth (WHO 2009).
The HBV vaccine is supported by The Vaccine Aliance
(Gavi) in countries eligible because of low income levels.
By the end of 2011, Gavi estimated that the vaccines it
has supported would save 5.5 million lives, 3.7 million of
them attributable to the HBV vaccine.
Dramatic reductions in the prevalence of HBV carriage
have been demonstrated in early adopters of universal vaccination. In China, for example, vaccination has reduced
the prevalence of carriage from greater than 10 percent
to less than 1 percent (Cui and others 2010). In Taiwan,
China, mortality rates from infant fulminant hepatitis,
chronic liver disease, and HCC have declined more than
90 percent among those vaccinated since a nationwide
HBV immunization began (Chiang and others 2013).
Screening for and Treating HBV
In addition to vaccination, testing blood donors for
chronic infection and excluding positive blood has
eliminated this relatively small but important source
of infection. A global program to reduce needle reuse
and to ensure the safe disposal of used needles has also
reduced the risk of infection.
More recently, antiviral treatment of those chronically
infected has been shown to reduce the risk of liver cancer.
Studies are underway in countries with a high prevalence
of HBV in adults to screen for carriage, evaluate those
found infected, and treat those with significant disease.
Hepatitis C Virus
Although no vaccines against HCV are available, most
HCV transmission could be avoided. Needle sharing by

intravenous drug users has become the predominant
source of HCV acquisition in high-resource countries
(Nelson and others 2011). In contrast, most infections in
low-resource countries are iatrogenic, acquired through
contaminated blood and contaminated injections of
medications. Many low-resource countries, mostly in
East Asia and Pacific, South Asia, and Sub-Saharan Africa,
do not systematically screen blood donations for HCV,
although screening for HBV and human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) is common (Prati 2006). Blood safety
in low-resource countries is additionally threatened by
lack of voluntary, nonpaid blood donors; inadequate
supplies of medical instruments and laboratory reagents;
and lack of infrastructure. Many transfusions could be
avoided with the use of appropriate measures to optimize
the patient’s own blood volume before surgery and to
minimize blood loss during surgery (Goodnough 2013).
More than 16 billion injections are administered annually in low-resource countries (Prati 2006). Especially high
rates of injections have been reported in Mongolia and
some countries of the former Soviet Union; they have
also been reported in Pakistan (Ahmad 2004) and some
Sub-Saharan African countries (Attia 1998). The most
frequently injected medications, nearly all of which could
be taken orally, include antibiotics, vitamins, iron, and
analgesics, as well as treatments for nonspecific symptoms
such as headache, fatigue, or fever. Injections represent
an important source of revenue for providers and are
encouraged by the popular belief that injections are more
effective than oral administration. Insufficient hygiene,
inappropriate use of multiple-dose medication vials, and
sharing bottles of intravenous solution also contribute to
the spread of HCV. Finally, HCV transmission can occur
through traditional medicine (for example, acupuncture
and scarring) and outside health care settings (for example, tattooing). Preventing infection is the most affordable
option to reduce HCV-related diseases in low-resource
countries (box 8.1).
Screening and Treating Chronic HCV
Much progress has been made in the management of
chronic hepatitis C, in terms of eradicating the virus
and reducing hepatic and extrahepatic complications
and HCV-related deaths. Increasingly efficacious regimens have been developed to eradicate the virus. The
first was interferon monotherapy, which was introduced
in 1990; a combination of ribavirin and pegylated interferon was introduced in 2002; and in 2011, a protease
inhibitor (telaprevir or boceprevir) was added to ribavirin and pegylated interferon (Morgan and others 2013).
A new generation of direct-acting antiviral drugs,
the first two of which entered the market in late 2013—
sofosbuvir and simeprevir—is promising. Compared
with the best previous regimens, they are significantly
Liver Cancer

155

Box 8.1

Interventions to Prevent Blood-Borne
Infections, Including HCV
• Increase awareness of the importance of
HCV and other blood-borne infections and
the means of preventing them, among the
population, health care workers, and traditional healers.
• Use oral treatments instead of injections and
use alternatives to blood transfusions whenever possible.
• Use safe injection practices in the management of sharp waste.
• Provide services to intravenous drug users,
including access to sterile needles and syringes.
• Make blood supplies safe by recruiting voluntary donors and screening all donated
blood for markers of HCV, HBV, and HIV.
Note: HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus; HIV = human immunodeficiency virus.

more effective in clearing the virus (in trials, up to
100 percent of patients cleared, including multiple viral
genotypes), are taken for half the treatment period of
previous regimens (12 versus 24 weeks), have few side
effects, and are taken orally (with another oral antiviral
drug, ribavirin) rather than having an injectable component. At least two other similar drugs are in late-stage
development. Hepatitis C medications were put on the
WHO Essential Medicines List in 2015. They are all,
however, priced well above what is affordable in LMICs;
they would have serious budgetary implications, even in
HICs. In the United States in 2014, sofosbuvir is priced
at US$84,000 for a course of treatment, and simeprivir
at US$66,000. Because the previous regimens are also
expensive (US$25,000–US$45,000), relatively few HCVinfected people anywhere have been treated. In 2010, an
estimated 7 percent of those with chronic infection in
France were treated, 3 percent in the United Kingdom,
and 0.3 percent in Russia (Razavi and others 2013).
The only way the new anti-HCV drugs can benefit
most infected individuals is if they can be made affordable, particularly in LMICs. Patents on these drugs will
not begin to expire until 2025. In the meantime, several
hundred thousand deaths per year could be averted by
finding an acceptable means of setting lower prices,
at least for LMICs, similar to the success story of lowpriced antiretrovirals for HIV.

156

Cancer

One of the factors allowing for low-priced antiretrovirals for HIV has been the economies of scale that
come with a hugely expanded market. Hill and others
(2014) estimate the minimum production costs of
the two available HCV drugs, the two in late-stage
development, and ribavirin, using the history of HIV
drugs as a guide. Using these costs, they estimate the
costs of complete combination 12-week regimens
at from US$78 to US$166 for the least expensive, to
US$232 to US$454 for the most expensive. Recognizing
that companies require compensation for their investment and profit, these are not suggested as realistic
sales prices; however, with tiered pricing (charging
higher prices in richer countries) and high volumes,
affordable prices can be envisioned and should be
pursued by the global community for this now highly
curable infection.
Widespread treatment implies screening, as well,
which currently is recommended for relatively few
individuals. Should treatment be made affordable, the
recommended populations should be expanded.
Aflatoxins
Human exposure to aflatoxins can be reduced in several
ways. Aspergillus spp. infects crops during cultivation, but
toxins accumulate postharvest under poor storage conditions. Accordingly, preharvest and postharvest interventions can contribute to controlling aflatoxins (Groopman,
Kensler, and Wild 2008; Wild and Hall 2000). Aflatoxin
control measures are applied to commercial crops to
meet the stringent regulatory demands to limit exposure
in HICs. Industrial-scale sorting, optimal storage, and
extensive aflatoxin testing programs combine to limit
exposure in wealthier nations. In contrast, little is done
to reduce the exposure of the populations in LICs, where
aflatoxin levels are high (Pitt and others 2012).
The most effective measure to reduce exposure is to
avoid consumption of contaminated foods or to reduce
dependence on them. In China, for example, economic
development led to a shift from consumption of maize to
rice, which is far less susceptible to aflatoxin contamination. This dietary shift has been linked to reduced exposure to aflatoxins and falling HCC rates (Chen and others
2013). However, many of the poorest populations remain
trapped by poverty and the lack of dietary alternatives.
Preharvest mycotoxin control includes a wide range
of good agricultural practices to reduce crop stress—
such as irrigation; early sowing; low plant density; and
the use of fungicides, pesticides, and insecticides—as
well as the identification of fungus-resistant strains,
genetic engineering of crop resistance, and biocontrol
(Pitt and others 2012). Biocontrol is one of the most

vigorously investigated approaches (Mehl and others
2012), although it is too early to know whether it will produce usable interventions (Atehnkeng and others 2008).
The approach relies on competitive exclusion: strains
of Aspergillus that do not produce aflatoxin (atoxigenic
strains) are introduced into the soil, and they compete
with native aflatoxin-producing spores for colonization
of crops. The cost can be high; ensuring access and sustainability at the subsistence or small-farm level is critical.
Increased aflatoxin during storage is a major problem
with dietary staples, such as maize and groundnuts in
LMICs. Improved storage presents the simplest and most
affordable opportunity for limiting exposure in such
settings. In studies in West Africa, basic improvements
in sorting, drying, and storing the groundnut crop in
West Africa resulted in marked reductions in aflatoxin
contamination, feasibly and cost-effectively (Turner and
others 2013; Wu and Khlangwiset 2010a, 2010b), suggesting that simple, inexpensive approaches can offer
significant benefits. Nevertheless, challenges remain in
scaling up and implementing such approaches.
Once present in a food commodity, the toxins are
relatively resistant to destruction during preparation
and cooking. An exception is the use of alkaline methods (nixtimalization), for example, using lime for maize
tortilla preparation, as is done by some populations in
Latin America and the Caribbean (Pitt and others 2012).
An alternative to primary prevention is to modify
the effects of toxins once ingested, either by preventing
absorption or by modifying metabolism (Groopman,
Kensler, and Wild 2008). Reduced absorption has been
achieved in animal feeds by the incorporation of clays into
feeds to bind aflatoxin in the gastrointestinal tract; this
process remains at the pilot phase in humans (Wang and
others 2008) and may be limited to emergency situations
of high contamination and food insufficiency. In terms
of altered metabolism, several compounds have been
explored—including chlorophyllin, oltipraz, and broccoli
sprout extract (Groopman, Kensler, and Wild 2008)—but
these have not been translated to widespread application.
Alcohol
Alcohol is found in beer, wine, and liquor, as well as in
some medicines, mouthwashes, household products,
and essential oils (for example, scented liquids taken
from plants). The alcohol content of various alcoholic
beverages varies: 3–7 percent for beers and hard ciders;
9–15 percent for wines and sake; 16–20 percent for wines
fortified with liquors, such as port; and 35–40 percent
for liquor or distilled spirits, such as gin, rum, vodka,
and whiskey (IARC 2012b). Alcohol consumption varies among adults over age 15 years in different parts of

the world. From 2003 to 2005, average annual alcohol
consumption per adult (over age 15) was highest in
Europe and Central Asia (12.2 liters of pure alcohol);
followed by North and South America (8.7 liters), the
western Pacific (6.3 liters), Sub-Saharan Africa (6.2 liters),
and southeast Asia (2.2 liters); it was lowest in the eastern
Mediterranean (0.7 liters) (WHO 2008).
Excessive alcohol consumption can take the form of
heavy drinking, binge drinking, or any drinking by pregnant women or underage youth (CPSTF 2013). Heavy
drinking is defined as more than two drinks per day on
average for men or more than one drink per day on average for women. Binge drinking is defined as five or more
drinks during a single occasion for men, or four or more
drinks during a single occasion for women.
Several interventions have been developed to reduce
excessive alcohol consumption. The U.S. Community
Preventive Services Task Force has reviewed the effectiveness of current intervention strategies, although not
commenting on the use of interventions outside the
United States. The recommended effective interventions
that are most likely to be applicable in LMICs include
the following:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Increase alcohol taxes.
Maintain limits on days of sale.
Maintain limits on hours of sale.
Enforce laws against privatizing retail alcohol sales.
Regulate alcohol outlet density.
Enhance enforcement of laws prohibiting sales to
minors.

The effectiveness of other interventions, such
as overservice law enforcement initiatives—efforts to
increase enforcement of laws against serving intoxicated
individuals—and responsible beverage service training, is
not supported by sufficient evidence to recommend them.
Unfortunately, very little information is available about
the effects of these and alternative interventions in LMICs.
Liver Flukes
Infection with liver flukes can be prevented, and infections can be treated with a single dose of praziquantel,
an inexpensive and relatively safe drug. Infections are
detected by the presence of eggs excreted in stool, a standard laboratory procedure. Once cholangiocarcinoma
develops, like HCC, treatment of the cancer is almost
always futile.
The simplest means of preventing infection appears
to be stopping the consumption of raw fish. This
approach, however, has not been simple, because raw fish
dishes are well-established components of the cuisine of
certain cultures.

Liver Cancer

157

Control programs in Thailand started in the 1950s.
In the late 1980s, the Thai government initiated a new
three-pronged control strategy that includes screening
and treatment with single-dose praziquantel (which has
a cure rate of 95 percent or higher), education programs
to encourage cooking fish before eating, and practicing
hygienic defecation (Jongsuksuntigul and Imsomboon
2003). The large decreases in infection prevalence in
Thailand are attributed to these combined efforts.
Finally, work is proceeding on a vaccine against
O. viverrini and is considered a feasible development
(Sripa and others 2011).
Treatment of HCC
Liver resection and liver transplantation are the gold
standards for treating HCC, but even with the best treatment, survival is poor. In the United States, five-year
relative survival from liver cancer was 16 percent during
the 2000s, with a plurality of patients diagnosed with
early-stage disease. Survival from late-stage disease was
less than 5 percent (NCI 2013).
Some new loco-regional ablative methods, notably,
percutaneous radiofrequency ablation, may represent
safer and cheaper alternatives for small lesions (less than
5.0 centimeters) (Zhang and Chen 2010) and may eventually be commonly used in LMICs.

COSTS AND COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF
INTERVENTIONS
Fortunately—and unlike most other major cancers—
preventive interventions for all of the major risk factors are
feasible. However, as is the case for other cancers and many
other conditions, costs and cost-effectiveness are not well
studied in LMICs. We present the evidence as documented
in the literature, focusing first on prevention and then on
treatment of liver cancer. We could find no economic analysis of liver fluke control. (Discussion of excessive alcohol
consumption prevention is covered in DCP3 volume 4,
Mental, Neurological, and Substance Use Disorders.)
HBV Control
Vaccination against HBV is highly cost-effective in
HBV-endemic countries. The economic evidence from
China suggests that universal HBV vaccination is costsaving compared with not vaccinating (Hutton, So, and
Brandeau 2010). Even in India, a low HBV-endemic
country, universal HBV vaccination is also highly costeffective at US$13.22 per quality-adjusted life year
(QALY) gained (Aggarwal, Ghoshal, and Naik 2003).
Since the introduction of vaccines in the 1980s, more

158

Cancer

and more countries have begun vaccinating; now, 168 of
190 WHO member countries have implemented universal hepatitis B vaccination in newborns and infants.
Chronic HBV can be treated with medications,
although current therapy seldom results in a cure
(Aman and others 2012). The antiviral agents currently
used include lamivudine, adefovir, tenofovir, telbivudine, entecavir, and the two immune system modulators,
interferon alpha-2a and pegylated interferon alpha-2a.
Lifetime treatment inhibits virus replication, minimizing liver damage and reducing the risk of HCC
(Matsumoto and others 2005). In an Indian study,
the incremental cost-effectiveness ratio (ICER) per
QALY gained associated with interferon use compared
with usual care was six times the per capita GDP of India
(Aggarwal, Ghoshal, and Naik 2002); this cost is not considered cost-effective according to the WHO definition
of cost-effectiveness, as an ICER less than three times the
per capita GDP of the country. Even if drug therapy were
cost-effective in HICs, it may be unaffordable in LMICs.
For example, the ICER per QALY gained for lamivudine
in HICs ranged from 0.024 per capita GDP in Australia
(Crowley and others 2000) to 0.819 per capita GDP in
the United States (Yuan and others 2008). In LMICs, the
ICER per QALY gained for lamivudine could be as high
as three times the per capita GDP (Lui and others 2010).
Therefore, the current strategy of treating patients from
a young age is very expensive for LMICs, although this
could change when the price of these drugs declines.
Future studies should explore the cost-effectiveness of
treating older patients before the onset of cirrhosis,
possibly using on-off treatment that may be significantly
less costly but have similar long-term clinical benefits.
HCV Control
There is no effective vaccine for HCV, but viral transmission can be prevented by reducing exposure to infected
blood products and unsafe medical procedures, the main
routes of infection in LMICs (Kermode 2004). Screening
blood donors and improving the safety of medical procedures can significantly reduce HCV infection (Chanzy
and others 1999; Wang and others 2013). The main
laboratory test for detecting HCV in blood donations
is the third-generation HCV antibody enzyme-linked
immunosorbent assay, which has high sensitivity and
specificity (Colin and others 2001).
Unsafe injections, which could be eliminated by
single-use needles and syringes, are another important route for HCV transmission in LMICs. A recent
cost-benefit analysis reported that introducing autodisable syringes (which prevent reuse by locking mechanisms or other mechanical means) for all medical

injections in India would be highly cost-effective, costing
US$46–US$48 per DALY (Reid 2012).
Standard antiviral therapy for HCV before the
new generation of drugs—pegylated interferon plus
ribavirin—cures more than half of all patients (Hartwell
and Shepherd 2009). However, the treatment takes
months and is expensive, making it cost-effective only
in patients in HICs who have progressive liver disease
placing them at high risk of HCC (Shepherd and others
2004). The new drugs discussed earlier in this chapter are
currently even more expensive, but more effective, are all
oral, and are taken for a shorter duration. If costs can be
brought down, they could become affordable in LMICs.
Aflatoxin Control
The economic burden of HCC in LMICs can be reduced
by controlling the risk of food contamination by aflatoxin. Preharvest and postharvest interventions are
possible.
Good farming practices to reduce crop stress (for
example, irrigation; early sowing; low plant density; use
of fungicides, pesticides, and insecticides) reduce aflatoxin production in addition to providing other more
direct benefits, but the practices may be costly. For example, advanced irrigation systems cost US$740–US$940
per acre in the United States (Burt 2000).
Introducing atoxigenic strains of Aspergillus is potentially cost-effective in LMICs (Khlangwiset and Wu
2010; Wu and Khlangwiset 2010a, 2010b). In Nigeria,
local atoxigenic strains of A. flavus were inoculated on
maize and substantial reductions in aflatoxin levels
were achieved (Atehnkeng and others 2008); data from
additional field trials are awaited. Sun drying and hand
sorting, together with other postharvest measures, were
effective in reducing aflatoxins in the groundnut crop
in Guinea and were considered cost-effective (Wu and
Khlangwiset 2010b).
Postharvest interventions include sorting, adequate
drying, and good storage conditions for grains. In
large-scale commercial farming, mechanical blanching and sorting is highly cost-effective in the United
States, completely eliminating aflatoxin at a cost of
US$150–US$170 per ton (Dorner and Lamb 2006).
However, their reliance on electricity and technical
support puts them out of reach in many LMICs. The
cost-effectiveness of artificial drying to reduce aflatoxin
is highly correlated with the costs of fuel and electricity
and moisture content in harvested crops.
Costs of Treating HCC
The clinical burden of HCC in LMICs is relatively well
understood, but analyses of health expenditures for

treating HCC are almost entirely lacking. A thorough
search of the medical literature identified just three
studies of health expenditures for HCC treatment, all
in HICs. The average treatment cost in Russia for an
HCC patient in 2008 was US$10,400, almost equal to
the per capita GDP in that year. Inpatient care accounted
for 90 percent of the total. The average indirect cost
associated with HCC was US$707, in which productivity loss accounted for 26 percent and social welfare for
disability accounted for 74 percent (Omelyanovsky and
others 2010).
The second study is from Taiwan, China, and reports
on national insurance claims data for 2,873 patients
diagnosed between 1996 and 2002 (Lang and others
2008). More than 30 percent of the patients had died
within one year of diagnosis. The highest expenditures
accrued during the six months before death, equaling
US$7,183, or half of Taiwan, China’s per capita GDP in
2002. The projected 10-year costs were the equivalent of
the per capita GDP.
A recent Canadian study investigated the health
care costs of 2,341 HCC patients in Ontario, Canada,
from 2002 to 2008. Average five-year net costs were
US$77,509, or US$15,502 annually, about 30 percent of
Canada’s 2008 per capita GDP.
Without studies from LMICs, it is impossible to
know what the economic burden of treating HCC would
be, but we can make some inferences. First, we know
that patients in LMICs are much less likely to receive
treatment than patients in HICs. Most HCCs, even in
HICs, are diagnosed at late stages. Second, for those who
are treated, the dollar costs might be somewhat lower
than in the studies cited, assuming lower input prices.
However, it is likely to be an even larger fraction of per
capita GDP—possibly many multiples—making the
burden even heavier for what is, in most cases, treatment
that does not save the patient’s life.
Summary of Costs
The direct and indirect costs of HCC in LMICs are
higher compared with costs in HICs because the disease
is more frequent, it occurs at younger ages, and diagnosis
is often delayed.
The most cost-effective approaches to preventing
HCC are the following:
• Reducing the prevalence of HBV through vaccination
of infants, including a birth dose, and uninfected
adolescents.
• Preventing HCV transmission by blood donor
screening and safe injection practices, including autodisable syringes.

Liver Cancer

159

• Controlling aflatoxin through postharvest and
possibly some preharvest (genetically resistant maize
and/or atoxigenic strains of Aspergillus) practices.
• Educating people to eat fully cooked food in areas
with high prevalence of liver fluke infection to prevent cholangiocarcinoma.
• Treating liver fluke infection with single-dose
praziquantel.

attractive, especially if preventive measures have
reduced transmission.
• HCC and cholangiocarcinoma treatments, which are
usually unsuccessful for long-term survival in any
country, particularly because the diseases are not usually diagnosed until late stages. Liver cancer treatment
cannot be recommended as an important control
strategy for LMICs.

Approaches that are not currently cost-effective are
the following:

The economic attractiveness of these interventions
may change, however, as new technologies are introduced
and the prices of existing effective technologies fall.

• Antiviral therapies for HBV and HCV, which are very
expensive and require extended periods of treatment
(HBV requires lifetime treatment). They are used
by only a small fraction of infected individuals in
HICs and unlikely to be cost-effective in LMICs.
However, as treatment efficacy improves and prices
moderate, these interventions could become more
Table 8.1 Liver Cancer Risk Factors and Feasible Interventions
Risk factor

Intervention

Costeffectiveness

HBV

HBV vaccine

+++

HBV treatment

−/+

Blood supply protection

+++

Blood supply protection

+++

Safe medical injection

+++

Programs to provide clean needles for injecteddrug users

++

HCV treatment

−/+

Preharvest good agricultural practices to reduce
crop stress

++

Fungus-resistant strains

++

Biocontrol

Not yet known

Postharvest sorting, storing, drying

+++

Improved grain storage

+++

Postharvest treatment of grain

+

Postingestion effect modification

–

Taxation

+++

Legal/regulatory interventions

+++

Behavioral interventions

++

Public education to avoid raw fish

++

Screen for infection and treat with praziquantel

++

HCV

Aflatoxin

Alcohol

Liver flukes

Note: Scale from not cost-effective (−) to highly cost-effective (+++) in low- and middle-income
countries. HBV = hepatitis B virus; HCV = hepatitis C virus.

160

Cancer

CONCLUSIONS
Liver cancer is among the least successfully treated of
all cancers but among the most readily prevented. Each
major risk factor is amenable to modification by feasible
and cost-effective (and some effective but expensive)
interventions. Some of these should become more
affordable in LMICs in the medium term; for example,
drugs that are currently expensive will eventually be
much less expensive. All of these interventions will prevent morbidity and mortality from other liver diseases
and, in the case of alcohol, from a number of other
conditions. The risk factors and interventions are summarized in table 8.1.

NOTES
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income per capita
for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries: US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries:
• Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income: US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries: US$12,746 or more
1. Maps and figures in this chapter are based on incidence
and mortality estimates for ages 0 to 69, consistent
with reporting in all Disease Control Priorities volumes.
Global cancer statistics are estimates for the year 2012
and have been provided by the International Agency for
Research on Cancer from its GLOBOCAN 2012 database. Observable population-based data were derived
from Cancer Incidence in Five Continents, 10th edition
(Forman and others 2013) and for trends over time from
CI5 Plus (http://ci5.iarc.fr/CI5plus/Default.aspx). The
discussion of burden (including risk factors), however,
includes all ages unless otherwise noted. Interventions also
apply to all age groups, except where age ranges or cutoffs
are specified.

REFERENCES
Aggarwal, R., U. C. Ghoshal, and S. R. Naik. 2002. “Treatment
of Chronic Hepatitis B with Interferon-Alpha: CostEffectiveness in Developing Countries.” The National
Medical Journal of India 15 (6): 320–27. http://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/12540064.
———. 2003. “Assessment of Cost-Effectiveness of Universal
Hepatitis B Immunization in a Low-Income Country with
Intermediate Endemicity Using a Markov Model.” Journal
of Hepatology 38 (2): 215–22. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/pubmed/12547411.
Ahmad, K. 2004. “Pakistan: A Cirrhotic State?” The Lancet 364
(9448): 1843–44. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(04)17458-8.
Alcorn, T. 2011. “Mongolia’s Struggle with Liver Cancer.” The
Lancet 377 (9772): 1139–40. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/pubmed/21465699.
Allen, N. E., V. Beral, D. Casabonne, S. W. Kan, G. K. Reeves,
and others. 2009. “Moderate Alcohol Intake and Cancer
Incidence in Women.” Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 101 (5): 296–305. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/pubmed/19244173.
Alter, H. J., and L. B. Seeff. 2000. “Recovery, Persistence, and
Sequelae in Hepatitis C Virus Infection: A Perspective on
Long-Term Outcome.” Seminars in Liver Disease 20 (1):
17–35. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10895429.
Aman, W., S. Mousa, G. Shiha, and S. A. Mousa. 2012.
“Current Status and Future Directions in the Management
of Chronic Hepatitis C.” Virology Journal 9: 57. http://www
.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3325870
&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
Atehnkeng, J., P. S. Ojiambo, T. Ikotun, R. A. Sikora, P. J. Cotty, and
others. 2008. “Evaluation of Atoxigenic Isolates of Aspergillus
Flavus as Potential Biocontrol Agents for Aflatoxin in Maize.”
Food Additives & Contaminants. Part A, Chemistry, Analysis,
Control, Exposure & Risk Assessment 25 (10): 1264–71. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18608502.
Attia, M. A. 1998. “Prevalence of Hepatitis B and C in Egypt
and Africa.” Antiviral Therapy 3 (Suppl. 3): 1–9. http://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10726051.
Baffy, G., E. M. Brunt, and S. H. Caldwell. 2012. “Hepatocellular
Carcinoma in Non-Alcoholic Fatty Liver Disease: An
Emerging Menace.” Journal of Hepatology 56 (6): 1384–91.
doi:10.1016/j.jhep.2011.10.027.
Boffetta, P., and M. Hashibe. 2006. “Alcohol and Cancer.” The
Lancet Oncology 7 (2): 149–56. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/pubmed/16455479.
Burt, C. M. 2000. “Selection of Irrigation Methods for
Agriculture.” Environmental and Water Resources
Institute (U.S.). On-Farm Irrigation Committee. Reston,
VA: American Society of Civil Engineers. http://mobius
.missouri.edu:2082/record=b14299016~S0.
Chanzy, B., D. L. Duc-Bin, B. Rousset, P. Morand, C. MorelBaccard, and others. 1999. “Effectiveness of a Manual
Disinfection Procedure in Eliminating Hepatitis C
Virus from Experimentally Contaminated Endoscopes.”
Gastrointestinal Endoscopy 50 (2): 147–51. http://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10425404.

Chen, C. J., and D. S. Chen. 2002. “Interaction of Hepatitis B
Virus, Chemical Carcinogen, and Genetic Susceptibility:
Multistage Hepatocarcinogenesis with Multifactorial
Etiology.” Hepatology (Baltimore, MD) 36 (5): 1046–49.
doi:10.1053/jhep.2002.37084.
Chen, C. J., M. W. Yu, and Y. F. Liaw. 1997. “Epidemiological
Characteristics and Risk Factors of Hepatocellular Carcinoma.”
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 12 (9–10):
S294–308. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9407350.
Chen, J.-G., J. Zhu, D. M. Parkin, Y. H. Zhang, J. H. Lu, and
others. 2006. “Trends in the Incidence of Cancer in Qidong,
China, 1978–2002.” International Journal of Cancer 119 (6):
1447–54. doi:10.1002/ijc.21952.
Chen, J.-G., P. A. Egner, D. Ng, L. P. Jacobson, and others. 2013.
“Reduced Aflatoxin Exposure Presages Decline in Liver
Cancer Mortality in an Endemic Region of China.” Cancer
Prevention Research 6: 1038. doi:10.1158/1940-6207.
Chiang, C.-J., Y.-A. Yang, S.-L. You, M.-S. Lai, and C.-J. Chen.
2013. “Thirty-Year Outcomes of the National Hepatitis B
Immunization Program in Taiwan.” JAMA 310 (9): 974–76.
Colin, C., D. Lanoir, S. Touzet, L. Meyaud-Kraemer, F. Bailly,
and C. Trepo. 2001. “Sensitivity and Specificity of ThirdGeneration Hepatitis C Virus Antibody Detection Assays:
An Analysis of the Literature.” Journal of Viral Hepatitis 8 (2):
87–95. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/11264728.
Corrao, G., and S. Arico. 2000. “Alcohol and Liver Cirrhosis:
Old Questions and Weakly Explored Opportunities.”
Addiction 95 (8): 1267–70. http://doi.wiley.com/10.1046
/j.1360-0443.2000.958126715.x.
Corrao, G., V. Bagnardi, A. Zambon, and C. La Vecchia. 2004.
“A Meta-Analysis of Alcohol Consumption and the Risk
of 15 Diseases.” Preventive Medicine 38 (5): 613–19. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15066364.
CPSTF (Community Preventive Services Task Force). 2013.
“Preventing Excessive Alcohol Consumption.” The
Community Guide [Internet]. U.S. Government. http://
www.thecommunityguide.org/alcohol/index.html.
Crowley, S. J., D. Tognarini, P. V. Desmond, and M. Lees. 2000.
“Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Lamivudine for the Treatment
of Chronic Hepatitis B.” PharmacoEconomics 17 (5): 409–27.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/10977384.
Cui, F., L. Li, S. C. Hadler, F. Wang, H. Zheng, and others. 2010.
“Factors Associated with Effectiveness of the First Dose of
Hepatitis B Vaccine in China: 1992–2005.” Vaccine 28 (37):
5973–78. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20637773.
Dienstag, J. L. 2008. “Hepatitis B Virus Infection.” New England
Journal of Medicine 359 (14): 1486–500. doi:10.1056
/NEJMra0801644. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed
/18832247.
Dondog, B., M. Lise, O. Dondov, B. Baldandorj, and
S. Franceschi. 2011. “Hepatitis B and C Virus Infections
in Hepatocellular Carcinoma and Cirrhosis in Mongolia.”
European Journal of Cancer Prevention 20 (1): 33–39. http://
www.torna.do/s/Dondov-O/.
Dorner, J. W., and M. C. Lamb. 2006. “Development and
Commercial Use of Afla-Guard(®), an Aflatoxin Biocontrol
Agent.” Mycotoxin Research 22 (1): 33–38. http://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23605499.

Liver Cancer

161

Evans, A. A., A. P. O’Connell, J. C. Pugh, W. S. Mason,
F. M. Shen, and others. 1998. “Geographic Variation in
Viral Load among Hepatitis B Carriers with Differing
Risks of Hepatocellular Carcinoma.” Cancer Epidemiology,
Biomarkers & Prevention 7 (7): 559–65. http://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/9681522.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, and
others. 2013. “GLOBOCAN v1.0, Cancer Incidence and
Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase No. 11” [Internet].
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France.
http://globocan.iarc.fr.
Forman D., F. Bray, D. H. Brewster, C. Gombe Mbalawa,
B. Kohler, M. Piñeros, E. Steliarova-Foucher, R. Swaminathan,
and J. Ferlay, eds. 2013. Cancer Incidence in Five Continents,
Vol. X (electronic version). IARC, Lyon. http://ci5.iarc.fr.
Fusco, M., E. Girardi, P. Piselli, R. Palombino, J. Polesel, and
others. 2008. “Epidemiology of Viral Hepatitis Infections
in an Area of Southern Italy with High Incidence Rates of
Liver Cancer.” European Journal of Cancer 44 (6): 847–53.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18313290.
Gao, X., Q. Cui, X. Shi, J. Su, Z. Peng, and others. 2011.
“Prevalence and Trend of Hepatitis C Virus Infection
among Blood Donors in Chinese Mainland: A Systematic
Review and Meta-Analysis.” BMC Infectious Diseases 11:
88. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?
artid=3079653&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
Gong, Y. Y., K. Cardwell, A. Hounsa, S. Egal, P. C. Turner,
and others. 2002. “Dietary Aflatoxin Exposure and
Impaired Growth in Young Children from Benin and
Togo: Cross Sectional Study.” BMJ (Clinical Research
Ed.) 325 (7354): 20–21. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.
gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=116667&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
Gong, Y., A. Hounsa, S. Egal, P. C. Turner, A. E. Sutcliffe,
and others. 2004. “Postweaning Exposure to Aflatoxin
Results in Impaired Child Growth: A Longitudinal Study
in Benin, West Africa.” Environmental Health Perspectives
112 (13): 1334–38. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov
/articlerender.fcgi?artid=1247526&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
Gong, Y. Y., S. Wilson, J. K. Mwatha, M. N. Routledge,
J. M. Castelino, and others. 2012. “Aflatoxin Exposure May
Contribute to Chronic Hepatomegaly in Kenyan School
Children.” Environmental Health Perspectives 120 (6):
893–96. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender
.fcgi?artid=3385435&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
Goodnough, L. T. 2013. “Blood Management: Transfusion
Medicine Comes of Age.” The Lancet 381 (9880): 1791–92.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/23706789.
Groopman, J. D., T. W. Kensler, and C. P. Wild. 2008.
“Protective Interventions to Prevent Aflatoxin-Induced
Carcinogenesis in Developing Countries.” Annual Review
of Public Health 29: 187–203. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/pubmed/17914931.
Haenel, H. 1989. “Alcohol Drinking.” IARC Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans. Volume 44.
IARC, Lyon, France.

162

Cancer

Hartwell, D., and J. Shepherd. 2009. “Pegylated and NonPegylated Interferon-Alfa and Ribavirin for the Treatment
of Mild Chronic Hepatitis C: A Systematic Review and
Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Technology
Assessment in Health Care 25 (1): 56–62. doi:10.1017
/S0266462309090084.
Hill, A., S. Khoo, J. Fortunak, B. Simmons, and N. Ford.
2014. “Minimum Costs for Producing Hepatitis C DirectActing Antivirals for Use in Large-Scale Treatment Access
Programs in Developing Countries.” Clinical Infectious
Diseases 58 (7): 928–36. doi:10.1093/cid/ciu012.
Hsieh, Y.-C., W.-S. Lee, P.-L. Shao, L.-Y. Chang, and L.-M. Huang.
2007. “The Transforming Streptococcus Pneumoniae in the
21st Century.” Chang Gung Medical Journal 31 (2): 117–24.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18567411.
Huang, Y-T., C-L. Jen, H-I. Yang, M-H. Lee, J. Su, and others.
2011. “Lifetime Risk and Sex Difference of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma among Patients with Chronic Hepatitis B
and C.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 29 (27): 3643–50.
doi:10.1200/JCO.2011.36.2335.
Hutton, D. W., S. K. So, and M. L. Brandeau. 2010. “CostEffectiveness of Nationwide Hepatitis B Catch-up
Vaccination among Children and Adolescents in China.”
Hepatology (Baltimore, MD) 51 (2): 405–14. http://www
.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3245734
&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2002.
“Some Traditional Herbal Medicines, Some Mycotoxins,
Naphthalene and Styrene.” IARC Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 82.
IARC, Lyon, France.
———. 2009. “Biological Agents.” IARC Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 100B.
IARC, Lyon, France.
———. 2012a. “A Review of Human Carcinogens. E. Personal
Habits and Indoor Combustions.” Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, Volume 100:
585. IARC, Lyon, France.
———. 2012b. “A Review of Human Carcinogens: Chemical
Agents and Related Occupations.” Monographs on the
Evaluation of Carcinogenic Risks to Humans, 100F. http://
monographs.iarc.fr/ENG/Monographs/vol100F/index.php.
Jongsuksuntigul, P., and T. Imsomboon. 2003. “Opisthorchiasis
Control in Thailand.” Acta Tropica 88 (3): 229–32.
doi:10.1016/j.actatropica.2003.01.002.
Kermode, M. 2004. “Unsafe Injections in Low-Income Country
Health Settings: Need for Injection Safety Promotion
to Prevent the Spread of Blood-Borne Viruses.” Health
Promotion International 19 (1): 95–103. http://www.ncbi
.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14976177.
Khlangwiset, P., and F. Wu. 2010. “Costs and Efficacy of Public
Health Interventions to Reduce Aflatoxin-Induced Human
Disease.” Food Additives & Contaminants: Part A 27 (7):
998–1014. doi:10.1080/19440041003677475
Kuniholm, M. H., O. A. Lesi, M. Mendy, A. O. Akano,
O. Sam, and others. 2008. “Aflatoxin Exposure and Viral
Hepatitis in the Etiology of Liver Cirrhosis in The Gambia,

West Africa.” Environmental Health Perspectives 116 (11):
1553–57. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender
.fcgi? artid=2592277&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype
=abstract.
Lang, H.-C., J.-C. Wu, S.-H. Yen, C.-F. Lan, and S.-L. Wu. 2008.
“The Lifetime Cost of Hepatocellular Carcinoma: A Claims
Data Analysis from a Medical Centre in Taiwan.” Applied
Health Economics and Health Policy 6 (1): 55–65. http://
www.ncbi. nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/18774870.
Lu, S.-N., W.-W. Su, S.-S. Yang, T.-T. Chang, K.-S. Cheng, and
others. 2006. “Secular Trends and Geographic Variations
of Hepatitis B Virus and Hepatitis C Virus-Associated
Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Taiwan.” International Journal
of Cancer 119 (8): 1946–52. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/pubmed/16708389.
Lui, Y. Y., K. K. Tsoi, V. W. Wong, J.-H. Kao, J.-L. Hou, and others. 2010. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Roadmap Models
in Chronic Hepatitis B Using Tenofovir as the Rescue
Therapy.” Antiviral Therapy 15 (2): 145–55. http://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/20386069.
Marinier, E., V. Barrois, B. Larouze, W. T. London, A. Cofer, and
others. 1985. “Lack of Perinatal Transmission of Hepatitis
B Virus Infection in Senegal, West Africa.” Journal of
Pediatrics 106 (5): 843–49. http://aje.oxfordjournals.org
/content/147/5/478.full.pdf.
Matsumoto, A., E. Tanaka, A. Rokuhara, K. Kiyosawa,
H. Kumada, and others. 2005. “Efficacy of Lamivudine for
Preventing Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Chronic Hepatitis
B: A Multicenter Retrospective Study of 2795 Patients.”
Hepatology Research 32 (3): 173–84. http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/16024289.
Mehl, H. L., R. Jaime, K. A. Callicott, C. Probst, N. P. Garber,
and others. 2012. “Aspergillus Flavus Diversity on Crops
and in the Environment Can Be Exploited to Reduce
Aflatoxin Exposure and Improve Health.” Annals of the New
York Academy of Sciences 1273: 7–17. http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/23230832.
Michelotti, G. A., M. V. Machado, and A. M. Diehl. 2013.
“NAFLD, NASH and Liver Cancer.” Nature Reviews
Gastroenterology and Hepatology 10: 656–65. doi:10.1038
/nrgastro.2013.183.
Morgan, R. L., B. Baack, B. D. Smith, A. Yartel, M. Pitasi,
and Y. Falck-Ytter. 2013. “Eradication of Hepatitis C
Virus Infection and the Development of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma: A Meta-Analysis of Observational Studies.”
Annals of Internal Medicine 158 (5 Pt 1): 329–37. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov /pubmed/23460056.
NCI (National Cancer Institute). 2013. “SEER Stat Fact Sheets:
Liver and Intrahepatic Bile Duct.” U.S. National Institutes
of Health, Bethesda, MD. http://seer.cancer.gov/statfacts
/html/livibd.html#survival.
Nelson, P. K., B. M. Mathers, B. Cowie, H. Hagan, D. D. Jarlais,
and others. 2011. “Global Epidemiology of Hepatitis B
and Hepatitis C in People Who Inject Drugs: Results
of Systematic Reviews.” The Lancet 378 (9791): 571–83.
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid
=3285467&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.

NIAAA (National Institute on Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism).
1993. “Alcohol and Cancer.” Alcohol Alert No. 21-1993.
http://pubs.niaaa.nih.gov/publications/aa21.htm.
Omelyanovsky, V. V., M. V. Avksentieva, I. Krysanov, and
O. Ivakhnenko. 2010. “PCN53 Analysis of Socioeconomic
Burden of Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Russia.”
Value in Health 13 (7): A260–61. doi:10.1016/S10983015(11)71948-9. http://www.valueinhealthjournal.com
/article/S1098-3015(11)71948-9.
Omer, R. E., A. Kuijsten, A. M. Y. Kadaru, F. J. Kok, M. O. Idris,
and others. 2004. “Population-Attributable Risk of Dietary
Aflatoxins and Hepatitis B Virus Infection with Respect to
Hepatocellular Carcinoma.” Nutrition and Cancer 48 (1):
15–21. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/15203373.
Oyunsuren, T., F. Kurbanov, Y. Tanaka, A. Elkady, R. Sanduijav,
and others. 2006. “High Frequency of Hepatocellular
Carcinoma in Mongolia; Association with Mono-, or
Co-Infection with Hepatitis C, B, and Delta Viruses.” Journal
of Medical Virology 78 (12): 1688–95. doi:10.1002/jmv.20755.
Pitt, J. I., C. P. Wild, R. A. Baan, W. C. A. Gelderblom,
J. D. Miller, R. T. Riley, and F. Wu. 2012. “Improving
Public Health through Mycotoxin Control.” IARC
Scientific Publication, No. 158. IARC, Lyon, France. http://
apps.who.int/bookorders/anglais/detart1 .jsp?codlan=1
&codcol=73&codcch=158#.
Prati, D. 2006. “Transmission of Hepatitis C Virus by Blood
Transfusions and Other Medical Procedures: A Global
Review.” Journal of Hepatology 45 (4): 607–16. http://www
.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/16901579.
Qian, G. S., R. K. Ross, M. C. Yu, J. M. Yuan, Y. T. Gao, and
others. 2013. “A Follow-up Study of Urinary Markers of
Aflatoxin Exposure and Liver Cancer Risk in Shanghai,
People’s Republic of China.” Cancer Epidemiology,
Biomarkers & Prevention 3 (1): 3–10. http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/8118382.
Raza, S. A., G. M. Clifford, and S. Franceschi. 2007. “Worldwide
Variation in the Relative Importance of Hepatitis B
and Hepatitis C Viruses in Hepatocellular Carcinoma:
A Systematic Review.” British Journal of Cancer 96: 1127–34.
doi:10.1038/sj.bjc.6603649.
Razavi, H., C. Estes, K. Pasini, E. Gower, and S. Hindman. 2013.
“51 HCV Treatment Rate in Select European Countries in
2004–2010.” Journal of Hepatology 58 (null): S22–23. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/S0168-8278(13)60053-7.
Reid, S. 2012. “Estimating the Burden of Disease from Unsafe
Injections in India: A Cost-Benefit Assessment of the
Auto-Disable Syringe in a Country with Low BloodBorne Virus Prevalence.” Indian Journal of Community
Medicine 37 (2): 89–94. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih
.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=3361807&tool=pmcentrez
&rendertype=abstract.
Shepherd, J., H. Brodin, C. Cave, N. Waugh, A. Price, and
others. 2004. “Pegylated Interferon Alpha-2a and -2b in
Combination with Ribavirin in the Treatment of Chronic
Hepatitis C: A Systematic Review and Economic Evaluation.”
Health Technology Assessment (Winchester, England) 8 (39):
iii–iv, 1–125.

Liver Cancer

163

Shin, H.-R., J.-K. Oh, E. Masuyer, M.-P. Curado, V. Bouvard,
and others. 2010. “Epidemiology of Cholangiocarcinoma:
An Update Focusing on Risk Factors.” Cancer Science 101
(3): 579–85. doi:10.1111/j.1349-7006.2009.01458.x.
Sithithaworn, P., and M. Haswell-Elkins. 2003. “Epidemiology
of Opisthorchis Viverrini.” Acta Tropica 88 (3): 187–94.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/14611873.
Smith, B. D., R. L. Morgan, G. A. Beckett, Y. Falck-Ytter,
D. Holtzman, and others. 2012. “Recommendations for the
Identification of Chronic Hepatitis C Virus Infection among
Persons Born during 1945–1965.” MMWR. Recommendations
and Reports: Morbidity and Mortality Weekly Report. Centers
for Disease Control 61 (RR-4): 1–32. http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/22895429.
Sripa, B., J. M. Bethony, P. Sithithaworn, S. Kaewkes, E. Mairiang,
and others. 2011. “Opisthorchiasis and OpisthorchisAssociated Cholangiocarcinoma in Thailand and Laos.”
Acta Tropica 120 (Suppl. 1): S158–68. doi:10.1016/j
.actatropica.2010.07.006.
Sun, Z., T. Chen, S. S. Thorgeirsson, Q. Zhan, J. Chen,
and others. 2013. “Dramatic Reduction of Liver Cancer
Incidence in Young Adults: 28 Year Follow-Up of
Etiological Interventions in an Endemic Area of China.”
Carcinogenesis 34 (8): 1800–05. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/pubmed/23322152.
Tanaka,Y., K. Hanada, M. Mizokami, A. E. T.Yeo, J. Wai-Kuo Shih,
and others. 2002. “A Comparison of the Molecular Clock
of Hepatitis C Virus in the United States and Japan Predicts
That Hepatocellular Carcinoma Incidence in the United
States Will Increase over the Next Two Decades.” Proceedings
of the National Academy of Sciences 99 (24): 15584–89.
http://www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?
artid=137760&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
Turner, P. C., A. Sylla, Y. Y. Gong, M. S. Diallo, A. E. Sutcliffe,
and others. 2013. “Reduction in Exposure to Carcinogenic
Aflatoxins by Postharvest Intervention Measures in West
Africa: A Community-Based Intervention Study.” The
Lancet 365 (9475): 1950–56. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov
/pubmed/15936422.
Vanni, E., and E. Bugianesi. 2014. “Obesity and Liver Cancer.”
Clinics in Liver Disease 18 (1): 191–203. doi:10.1016/j
.cld.2013.09.001.
Wang, J.-F., W.-Y. Lin, F. Jiang, W. Meng, and F.-M. Shen. 2010.
“Analysis of Time Trend of Hepatocellular Carcinoma
Mortality in Haimen City of Jiangsu Province from 1993
to 2006.” Zhonghua Liu Xing Bing Xue Za Zhi = Zhonghua
Liuxingbingxue Zazhi 31 (7): 727–32. http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/21162831.
Wang, J.-T., T.-H. Wang, J.-T. Lin, C.-Z. Lee, J.-C. Sheu, and
others. 2013. “Effect of Hepatitis C Antibody Screening in
Blood Donors on Post-Transfusion Hepatitis in Taiwan.”
Journal of Gastroenterology and Hepatology 10 (4): 454–58.
http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8527713.
Wang, L.-Y., M. Hatch, C.-J. Chen, B. Levin, S.-L. You, and
others. 1996. “Aflatoxin Exposure and Risk of Hepatocellular

164

Cancer

Carcinoma in Taiwan.” International Journal of Cancer 67 (5):
620–25. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/8782648.
Wang, L., Y. Wang, S. Jin, Z. Wu, D. P. Chin, and others.
2008. “Emergence and Control of Infectious Diseases in
China.” The Lancet 372 (9649): 1598–605. doi:10.1016
/S0140-6736(08)61365-3.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2004. “UNICEF/WHO
Workshop on the Expanded Programme on Immunizations
in the Pacific.” WHO, Regional Office for the Western
Pacific. http://iris.wpro.who.int/handle/10665.1/1663.
———. 2008. “Global Information System on Alcohol and
Health.” WHO, Geneva. http://apps.who.int/globalatlas
/default.asp.
———. 2009. “Weekly Epidemiological Record: Hepatitis B
Vaccines.” WHO Position Paper 40 (84): 405–20.
Wild, C. P., and Y. Y. Gong. 2010. “Mycotoxins and Human
Disease: A Largely Ignored Global Health Issue.”
Carcinogenesis 31 (1): 71–82. http://www.pubmedcentral.nih
.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2802673&tool= pmcentrez
&rendertype=abstract.
Wild, C. P., and A. J. Hall. 2000. “Primary Prevention of
Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Developing Countries.”
Mutation Research/Reviews in Mutation 462 (2–3): 381–93.
doi:10.1016/S1383-5742(00)00027-2.
Williams, J. H., T. D. Phillips, P. E. Jolly, J. K. Stiles, C. M. Jolly,
and D. Aggarwal. 2004. “Human Aflatoxicosis in Developing
Countries: A Review of Toxicology, Exposure, Potential
Health Consequences, and Interventions.” American Journal
of Clinical Nutrition 80 (5): 1106–22. http://www.ncbi.nlm
.nih.gov/pubmed/15531656.
Wu, F., and P. Khlangwiset. 2010a. “Evaluating the Technical
Feasibility of Aflatoxin Risk Reduction Strategies in Africa.”
Food Additives & Contaminants. Part A, Chemistry, Analysis,
Control, Exposure & Risk Assessment 27 (5): 658–76.
doi:10.1080/19440041003639582.
———. 2010b. “Health Economic Impacts and CostEffectiveness of Aflatoxin-Reduction Strategies in Africa:
Case Studies in Biocontrol and Post-Harvest Interventions.”
Food Additives & Contaminants. Part A, Chemistry, Analysis,
Control, Exposure & Risk Assessment 27 (4): 496–509. http://
www.pubmedcentral.nih.gov/articlerender.fcgi?artid=2858
428&tool=pmcentrez&rendertype=abstract.
Wu, H.-C., Q. Wang, H.-I. Yang, H. Ahsan, W.-Y. Tsai, and
others. 2009. “Aflatoxin B1 Exposure, Hepatitis B Virus
Infection, and Hepatocellular Carcinoma in Taiwan.” Cancer
Epidemiology, Biomarkers & Prevention 18 (3): 846–53.
doi:10.1158/1055-9965.EPI-08-0697.
Yuan, Y., U. H. Iloeje, J. Hay, and S. Saab. 2008. “Evaluation
of the Cost-Effectiveness of Entecavir versus Lamivudine
in Hepatitis BeAg-Positive Chronic Hepatitis B Patients.”
Journal of Managed Care Pharmacy 14 (1): 21–33.
Zhang, Y.-J., and M.-S. Chen. 2010. “Role of Radiofrequency
Ablation in the Treatment of Small Hepatocellular
Carcinoma.” World Journal of Heptalogy 2 (4): 146–50.
doi:10.4254/wjh.v2.i4.146.

Chapter

9

Cancer Pain Relief
James Cleary, Hellen Gelband, and Judith Wagner

INTRODUCTION
Despite substantial effort and expenditure, at least onethird of patients diagnosed with cancer in high-income
countries (HICs) die of their disease within a few years of
diagnosis (National Cancer Institute 2009). In low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs), two-thirds succumb,
because the cancer types prevalent in LMICs tend to
have poor prognoses, most cancers are advanced when
diagnosed, and even for curable cancers few people have
access to effective cancer treatment. For rich and poor
everywhere, cancer can cause pain and severe distress,
especially during the last few months of life. Cancerrelated pain is not the exclusive domain of those who
die of cancer. Even many who are cured of their disease
live with the long-term effects of the disease and its treatment; many of them live with pain, as do people with a
range of chronic conditions other than cancer.
For the majority of cancer patients in LMICs, the
most effective and feasible intervention for pain control is medication. For mild pain, over-the-counter,
inexpensive analgesic medicines can provide adequate
relief. When these nonopioids no longer relieve pain,
then weak opioids, such as codeine, may work. Cancer
patients most often experience worsening pain as their
cancer progresses; 70–80 percent progress to severe pain,
which only strong opioid medicines can relieve.
Other approaches are effective for specific pain
indications; the most widely applicable are palliative
radiotherapy and surgery. Chemotherapy, neurologic, psychological, and other approaches also can be

effective (see Foley and others 2006 for a comprehensive
listing). All but analgesic medications and psychological
approaches require access to well-developed health care
facilities; these are usually available in large urban areas
of middle-income countries (MICs), although not necessarily in sufficient numbers, but they may not exist at
all in low-income countries (LICs). For example, many
countries have no radiotherapy centers, and many have
only one center (International Atomic Energy Agency
Directory of Radiotherapy Centres, http://www-naweb
.iaea.org/nahu/dirac/default.asp). Palliative surgery and
palliative radiotherapy are discussed further in chapters
13 and 14, respectively. The focus of this chapter is pain
control medication, which can relieve most cancer pain
and can be delivered at home, even in remote areas.
Since 1990, the World Health Organization (WHO)
and other bodies have offered definitions of palliative
care. These definitions differ in specifics but share a
common vision of care that emphasizes effective pain
relief and a team approach to care throughout the
course of the illness (Cleary and Carbone 1997; Foley
and Gelband 2001; Morrison and Meier 2011; WHO
1990). The primary goal of palliative care is improving
the quality of life of patients and those around them; it
is not the prolongation of life or the hastening of death.
Access to pain relief has been declared a human right
(Brennan, Carr, and Cousins 2007; Gwyther, Brennan,
and Harding 2009; International Pain Summit of the
International Association for the Study of Pain 2011;
Lohman, Schleifer, and Amon 2010).

Corresponding author: James Cleary, MD, FRACP, FAChPM, University of Wisconsin, jfcleary@wisc.edu

165

From a global perspective, the growth of palliative
care has been largely limited to HICs, which also rank
high on the Human Development Index (HDI). The
availability of palliative care—using the availability of
opioid medicines as a surrogate—is correlated with a
country’s HDI. At the low end, the availability is almost
nil, and repeated surveys have shown that this availability changed only marginally between 2006 and 2011
(Gilson and others 2013).
In the previous edition of Disease Control Priorities
in Developing Countries, Foley and others (2006) documented the global problem of low access to adequate
pain relief in LMICs. Since then, a few countries have
improved access, but these accomplishments are sporadic; in many countries, the change is negligible. Now,
there is both cause for optimism and the view of a long
road ahead. Efforts to support leaders in reforming
policy and clinical practice in LMICs have grown and
provide a basis for improvements (Cherny and others
2013; Cleary, Radbruch, and others 2013).
This chapter describes the current state of
pain relief in LMICs, consistent with WHO’s use
of opioid consumption as a surrogate for access to
palliative care in the Global Monitoring Framework
for Noncommunicable Diseases (WHO 2013a). We
describe the gaps in pain control access across countries, analyze the barriers to improving its delivery, and
describe the costs and benefits that might accrue from
removing the barriers.
Evidence summarized in this chapter focuses on
the modest costs and substantial benefits of providing
pain control, and it supports increased efforts in the
short term. Pain control medication and other aspects
of palliative care can lead, rather than follow, increased
efforts in cancer treatment, relying on interventions
that are part of a more advanced cancer control and
treatment infrastructure.

CANCER PATIENTS’ NEED FOR PAIN
CONTROL MEDICATION
Patients with cancer usually experience pain at some
points during their illness, increasingly toward the end.
Mild and moderate pain often can be controlled with
commonly available analgesics, such as acetaminophen
and ibuprofen, but progressively stronger medications
are needed to control cancer pain as the illness progresses and pain becomes more severe. Opioids—such
as codeine and morphine—are invariably needed toward
the end of life. This progression is embodied in WHO’s
Three-Step Analgesic Ladder, developed in 1986 to guide
clinicians (WHO 1986). More recently, the American

166

Cancer

Pain Society has advocated an approach based on the
mechanism of pain together with its severity, but this
group also emphasized that all patients with cancer
should have access to opioids, as needed (Miaskowski
and others 2005).
How prevalent is the need for pain relief among
cancer patients in LMICs? Cancer deaths are rising
throughout the world as progress is made against
infectious diseases and as the world’s population ages.
In 2012, 5.3 million people died of cancer in LMICs,
compared with 2.9 million in HICs. In Sub-Saharan
Africa, 715,000 new cases and 542,000 cancer deaths
occurred in 2008; these numbers are projected to
nearly double by 2030 due to population growth and
aging (Ferlay and others 2010). The consensus among
researchers is that 60–90 percent of patients with
advanced cancer experience moderate to severe pain
(Cleeland and others 1988; Cleeland and others 1996;
Daut and Cleeland 1982; Foley 1979, 1999; Stjernsward
and Clark 2003). The intensity, degree of pain relief,
and effect of pain vary according to the type of cancer,
treatment, and personal characteristics, but prevalence
and severity of pain usually increase with the progression of the disease.
Foley and others (2006) estimated that about
80 percent of people dying of cancer would experience
moderate or severe pain that requires opioid medication
for relief for an average of 90 days before death. This
estimate amounts to 425 million days of cancer pain
that could be relieved by opioids in LMICs each year
currently.

STATUS OF PAIN CONTROL IN LMICs
In an ideal world, palliative care and pain control would
be one component of a cancer care system, but in nearly
all LICs and for the rural poor in many MICs, palliative
care—if it exists at all—is more likely to be independent of cancer services, and patients receive little or no
primary cancer treatment. Unfortunately, despite the
inclusion of morphine and codeine on WHO’s essential
medicines list (WHO 2013b), the programs to deliver
them are likely to be undeveloped, and patients go
without relief.
In 2006, 66 percent of the world’s population lived
in countries that had virtually no consumption of
opioids, 10 percent in countries with very low consumption, 3 percent in countries with low consumption,
and 4 percent in countries with moderate consumption (Seya and others 2011). Only 7.5 percent of the
world’s population lived in countries with consumption
levels defined as adequate. The level of adequacy of

AVAILABILITY OF BROADLY DEFINED
PALLIATIVE CARE SERVICES
The level of palliative care services available to cancer patients was assessed in 2007 by the International
Observatory of End of Life Care (Clark and others
2007) and again in 2011 (Lynch, Connor, and Clark
2013). Four categories were defined in 2007, and two
subcategories were added in 2011 (designated 3b and
4b, following):
1. No known hospice-palliative care activity
2. Capacity-building activity
3a. Isolated palliative care provision
3b. Generalized palliative care provision

Figure 9.1 Comparison of Opioid Consumption in Morphine Equivalents
without Methadone
(mg per capita)
45
Opioid consumption
(mg/capita, mor equiv without methadone)

40
35
30
25
20
15
10
5

World
AFRO

10

08

20

06

20

04

20

02

AMRO-North America
EMRO

20

00

20

98

20

96

19

94

19

92

19

90

19

88

19

86

19

84

19

82

19

19

80

0

19

access for a country was highly correlated with its HDI
(R2 = 0.7583) (Seya and others 2011).
To what extent is the need for cancer pain relief met
under these circumstances? Even with increases in certain areas, the starting levels are so low that the most
recent levels are only a fraction of the per capita use in
HICs (figure 9.1).
This global assessment is supported by new data
from sites in 26 countries representing all World
Bank income levels. The International Association
for Hospice and Palliative Care (IAHPC) conducted
its first round of the Opioid Price Watch (De Lima
and others 2014), which reports on availability of
opioids, as well as the prices that consumers pay for
those medicines. The survey was conducted in the
following manner: surveyors visited the pharmacy
closest to a public health facility treating patients
with life-threatening conditions. If that pharmacy
had no opioids in stock, or if the chief pharmacist
did not wish to participate, the surveyors visited the
next closest pharmacy; this process continued until at
least one opioid was found or the surveyor concluded
that none would be available anywhere. At least one
opioid was available in the first pharmacy sampled in
all seven HICs. In three of the eight low-income sites
in six countries (including three sites in Tanzania),
no opioids were found, even after visiting an average
of 4.5 pharmacies; where they were found, many fewer
kinds were available than in HICs. In three of the sample countries—Moldova, Nepal, and Sudan—opioids
for outpatients were available only from hospital
pharmacies with permission to dispense them, limiting
access geographically. No information was available on
consumption in Moldova or Sudan, and very low consumption was reported per capita in Nepal, suggesting
that most cancer patients have no access.

WPRO
SEARO

Source: Cleary, Radbruch, and others 2013.
Note: AFRO = Africa; AMRO-North America = Latin America and Caribbean (America not including
North America); EMRO = Middle East (Eastern Mediterranean); SEARO = Southeast Asia;
WPRO = Western Pacific.

4a. Hospice-palliative care services at a stage of preliminary integration into mainstream service provision
4b. Hospice-palliative care services at a stage of
advanced integration into mainstream service
provision.
Palliative care was in stage 4a or 4b primarily in HICs,
with only a handful of LMICs (mainly MICs) in the
highest category. In 2011, most countries still had no
services, were in a capacity-building mode, or had only
isolated services.

BARRIERS TO PAIN CONTROL IN LMICs
The near-total lack of access to opioid drugs for pain
relief in most LICs and many MICs is best understood
by examining the barriers to their supply (Cherny and
others 2013; Foley and others 2006; Sloan and Gelband
2007). In HICs, modern palliative care, including
access to opioid medicines and other methods of pain
control, has often developed as an adjunct to cancer
care programs. In LICs and many MICs, the same
pattern has been difficult to follow because care programs simply do not exist in most places. However,
cancer control programs are not the only things that

Cancer Pain Relief

167

are absent, sparse, or overstretched. Medical and pharmacy resources are lacking in numbers and quality;
medicines are costly and are most often paid for out
of pocket. Patients in some places are reluctant to use
addictive drugs, even in the last stages of illness, and
clinicians who have received little training in appropriate prescribing for cancer patients may reinforce this
reluctance.
The greatest and most widespread barrier, however—by far—comes from national regulations to control the nonmedical use of narcotics. These regulations
make it difficult or impossible for clinicians to prescribe
and patients to obtain opioids for relief of cancer pain.
These regulations have been put in place in response
to the Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961
(INCB 1961) and amended by the 1972 Protocol. The
Single Convention is an international treaty to ensure
the availability of opioids for medical and scientific
needs while preventing the illicit production of, trafficking in, and nonmedical use of narcotic drugs. The
Convention established the International Narcotics
Control Board (INCB) in 1968 as an independent,
quasi-judicial organization to implement the Single
Convention.
The Single Convention requires that all governments,
even nonsignatories, estimate the amounts of opioids
needed for medical and scientific purposes and report
annually on imports, exports, and consumption. It sets
out the following principles on which countries can base
their own policies and regulations:
• Individuals must be authorized to dispense opioids
by virtue of their professional license or be specially
licensed to do so.
• Opioids may be transferred only between authorized
parties.
• Opioids may be dispensed only with a medical
prescription.
• Security and records are required.
Despite the Convention’s recognition of the need
for opioid use in pain control—and the demonstration by organizations such as Hospice Africa Uganda
that the needs of patients can be met even in remote
areas while respecting these limits—the concern over
illegal narcotics has tipped the scale against the legitimate medical needs of patients. Many countries have
established regulations that go well beyond those
required by the Convention. Overzealous drug controllers and poorly considered laws and regulations
to restrict the diversion of medicinal opioids into
illicit markets profoundly interfere with the medical

168

Cancer

availability of opioids for the relief of pain. Often,
the logistics of pain treatment with opioids is so
burdensome or complex for physicians, nurses, and
pharmacists that they assume it is an impossible task
and do not pursue it. This problem has been recognized since the 1980s by INCB, WHO, the Council
of Europe, and Human Rights Watch (Cherny and
others 2010).
In 2000, WHO, in collaboration with INCB, developed guidelines for national authorities to scrutinize
their regulatory systems for barriers that could impede
access (WHO 2000). The movement to diagnose barriers
to access has led to several exemplary national reforms.
It appears that the very act of diagnosing regulatory
impediments to opioids for cancer pain is a strong first
step toward reform.
The international organizations that have collaborated in the Global Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI)1
have published a detailed country-specific analysis in
five regions of the world of the availability and regulatory restrictions on seven opioid analgesic formulations
(Cleary, De Lima, and others 2013; Cleary, Powell, and
others 2013; Cleary, Radbruch, and others 2013):
•
•
•
•
•
•
•

Codeine
Immediate-release morphine (liquid or tablet)
Controlled-release oral morphine
Injectable morphine
Oxycodone
Transdermal fentanyl
Immediate-release methadone

IAHPC deems these agents essential for treatment of
pain in palliative care (De Lima and Doyle 2007).
Respondents commonly reported that these opioids
were included in national formularies. The reality, however, was substantial variation in true availability and
many regulatory barriers to access.
Although the picture we present is lack of progress
on a broad scale, we can point to positive developments
that have improved the availability or delivery of opioid
medicines in particular situations (Gilson and others
2013). Cost has been reduced by the domestic manufacture of morphine tablets or solutions in Ethiopia
(2010), Jordan (2004), and Vietnam (2009). In Kenya
(2010), a tax on morphine powder was eliminated. In
Ethiopia, India, Kenya, and Vietnam, providers and
policy makers have been educated about the use of and
need for opioids.
National cancer policies or palliative care policies
have been created in a number of countries, laying the
groundwork for greater opioid availability. This has

been the case in Ethiopia (2004), Kenya (2011), Nepal
(2009), and Rwanda (2010). Jamaica took steps in
2010 and 2011 to clarify and facilitate opioid distribution through improved regulation. In Uganda (2004),
the National Drug Policy and Authority statute was
amended to allow specially trained palliative care nurses
and clinical officers to prescribe morphine, greatly
expanding the pool of providers and thus the population with access.
In Georgia (2008), Mongolia (2004), and Vietnam
(2008), the number of days allowed for an opioid
prescription was increased; in some cases, the eligible
patient population was expanded, for example, from
only patients with the most advanced cancers to those
with certain types of acute and chronic pain.

ECONOMICS OF PALLIATIVE CARE IN LMICs
We consider economics from two perspectives: that of
the health care system and that of the patients. In countries with comprehensive, publicly funded health care,
the governments pay for all or most of the services and
commodities needed for palliative care. The patients pay
either nothing or a predetermined copay.
In settings in which the public sector does not yet
provide or subsidize the cost of services, patients may
be responsible for all costs. The costs may be mainly
market-driven, but they also may include taxes, tariffs, and other government add-ons. In the case of
palliative care, the cost of pain control medications
is most important. Patients everywhere inevitably
bear other costs, including transportation and the
opportunity costs of family caregivers who miss work.
How high a barrier these costs impose varies with the
economic situation of the families and the support
available.

Health System Perspective
Evaluating the costs and effectiveness of palliative care
in LMICs presents challenges of the most basic kind.
No single model of palliative care delivery can be implemented across all countries; each country presents with
a unique constellation of health care resources and
challenges.
Studies comparing the costs of organized palliative
care programs for patients with cancer with care delivered in the absence of such programs are limited to
HICs, where conventional cancer care is already well
organized. Researchers reviewing such studies have concluded that organized palliative care tends to save health

care costs, compared with usual cancer care, because it
lowers hospitalization rates for patients who are terminally ill (Simoens and others 2010). No specific model
of palliative care appears to be superior to any other
(García-Pérez and others 2009).
An important difference exists in the availability
of pain relief in HICs and LMICs, however. Even
when palliative care programs do not exist in HICs,
medications for pain relief are usually available to
patients with cancer through conventional medical
care. Patients in LMICs are often unable to obtain
such medications in any health care setting. Yet, it is
telling that even when pain medications are readily
available through conventional cancer care, organized
programs for palliative care can enhance the effectiveness of pain control and lower the costs to the medical
care system. Health care providers who focus on and
are trained in cancer pain relief can reduce health
care costs, at least in HICs, and improve the quality
of life for patients and their caregivers (Amery and
others 2009).
Most patients in LICs and many in MICs do not
routinely receive care for cancer in hospitals; many
receive no cancer-specific care at all. Where this is the
case, improving access to pain relief at the end of life
may increase health care costs, because adding care to
a baseline of little or no care clearly involves new costs.
For the minority of cancer patients who receive endof-life care in hospitals, improving the availability of
pain medicine through dismantling regulatory barriers,
educating professionals, and integrating palliative care
programs may reduce health care costs, as such measures
have done in HICs.
A useful first step in assessing the cost of palliative
care to a health system is to assess the cost of the most
basic oral opioid medicine—oral morphine. Foley and
colleagues estimated the cost of oral morphine, and
medicines to treat side effects, sufficient for pain relief
in the last three months of life in three countries—
Chile, Romania, and Uganda—at between US$0.48 and
US$0.98 per day (US$ 2004) (Foley and others 2006).
In the United States, the average community
pharmacy’s acquisition cost of immediate-release oral
morphine tablets sufficient for three days at 60 mcg
per day was US$1.20 in 2014. More sophisticated
dosing forms may cost more to manufacture; new,
patented formulations include in their price a premium for intellectual property. A fentanyl patch, for
example, compares at US$4.09 for similar pain relief.2
Costs vary widely by country, depending on such
factors as whether medicines can be produced within
the country or must be imported, whether they face

Cancer Pain Relief

169

import duties, and the nature of the existing medicine
distribution system. An unfortunate circumstance is
that the factors that make opioids more expensive tend
to be prevalent in LMICs.
In some cases, making more effective pain relief medications available to patients with cancer by removing
regulatory barriers would involve no costs other than
the cost of the medicine itself. Where oral morphine is
already available and affordable, for example, the additional cost of providing other medicines deemed essential
for palliative care by IAHPC3 would be limited largely to
the drug costs alone, since the care delivery and narcotics control mechanisms would already be in place. The
training for professional staff in the appropriate use of
palliative medicines would be an ongoing cost, but that
cost would be spread across the population of patients
with cancer who are served.
In areas with no effective access to any opioids for
these patients, getting the most appropriate medicine
to patients is likely to involve additional clinic or home
visits with trained personnel, as well as new controls to
secure the medicines from theft or abuse.
Since 1993, Hospice Africa Uganda’s (HAU) model
program has offered palliative care to patients with
cancer, AIDS, and, increasingly, other (mainly noncommunicable) conditions. Most patients are seen at
home, but HAU also provides hospice care at inpatient facilities (HAU 2013). The service is nurse-led,
with physician backup. It includes basic needs support,
including food, clothing, blankets, and transport costs;
pain and symptom control, including morphine; and
other support services. HAU estimated that the cost of
adding a children’s palliative care program at a hospital for children and at HAU’s clinic was approximately
US$75 (US$ 2007) per child per year. About one-third of
that cost was for medicines and pharmacy consumables
(Amery and others 2009).
Patient Perspective
For patients, the most serious problem is that opioids
are not available at any price, even if prescribed. Where
they are available, price is the next consideration, but
reliable information on the price of pain medicines to
consumers has been lacking in LMICs. This deficit was
the impetus for IAHPC to begin the Opioid Price Watch,
an availability and price survey in a sample of 26 low-,
lower-middle-, and upper-middle-income countries and
HICs (De Lima and others 2014). The endpoints were
the availability and price of opioids to the consumer on
a single day in each site.
The survey included five opioids (13 formulations),
including those on WHO’s List of Essential Medicines

170

Cancer

(17th edition, WHO 2011) and additional medicines on
the IAHPC list of essential palliative care medicines:
• Fentanyl: transdermal patch
• Hydromorphone: injectable, oral liquid, oral solid
immediate release, oral solid sustained release
• Methadone: oral liquid, oral solid
• Morphine: injectable, oral liquid, oral solid
• Oxycodone: oral solid immediate release, oral solid
sustained release
The price of opioids, when available at all, was highest,
in absolute terms, in the poorest countries, except in
certain LMICs where they are free to patients; however,
these are countries with extremely low consumption,
meaning effectively no availability. In the Opioid Price
Watch sample, these no-cost but no-availability countries were Nepal (LIC), Sudan (LMIC), and Romania
(upper-middle income).
The least expensive drug globally, according to the
international buyer reference price, was the immediaterelease morphine oral solid; this was not the least expensive formulation (standardized to a 30-day average dose)
in many countries. Fentanyl patches were less expensive
in China (Chengdu), Germany, Guatemala, India, the
Islamic Republic of Iran, Norway, Poland, Spain, the
Philippines, and the United Kingdom, suggesting that
these governments subsidize at least some of these medicines and do so differentially.

CONCLUSIONS
There is no palliative care without pain control.
The benefits of opioid medicines for pain relief to
patients with cancer and their families, regardless of
their whereabouts, are real and universally observable.
These benefits have been known for decades, yet the vast
majority of those dying in pain cannot get these medicines, even though the basic forms are inexpensive, oral,
and relatively easy to administer at home. The movement to declare pain relief a human right reflects the
recognition that its benefits extend to the core of human
dignity. The question becomes not whether pain relief
with opioids is worth its cost, but what steps will most
quickly and efficiently facilitate access to these medications for those who need them, even in the absence of
organized cancer control efforts.
It has taken the inspired efforts of pioneers to build
palliative care capacity in LMICs, mainly in the private faith and philanthropic sectors, but involving, as
it must, government. According to the GOPI report,
many international and regional organizations are

focusing on palliative care, with efforts to find, train,
and support the leaders in each country or area. The
investment in leadership required to reform national
and regional policies is a real cost that must be supported. The next steps identified by GOPI (Cleary,
Radbruch, and others 2013), which they refer to as
the “cornerstone trinity,” are medication availability,
education, and policy reform. The costs of policy measures are front-loaded; once policies supporting the
widespread availability of pain medications to patients
with cancer are in place, they will need only routine
monitoring.
These conclusions are robust even in the absence
of large numbers of studies and supporting data
about the extent of palliative care available in LMICs.
The evidence supporting the effectiveness of pain
control medicines is strong and applicable worldwide,
but validation in LMICs would provide support to
expanded efforts. Studies detailing the lack of services, the personal consequences of dying in pain,
and the increasing burden of deaths from cancer and
other noncommunicable diseases will help to persuade policy makers and funders of the importance
of palliative care.
It is appropriate to note that progress has been made
in the past few years, but the main message remains
that very few of the increasing numbers of people
dying from cancer in LMICs can expect to die without
debilitating pain. Yet the interventions needed could
be made available affordably everywhere, in a relatively
short time, if given high enough priority and modest
resources.

NOTES
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income per capita
for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries: US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries:
• Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income: US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries: US$12,746 or more
1. African Organisation for Research and Training in Cancer,
African Palliative Care Association, Asia Pacific Hospice
Palliative Care Network, Chinese Society of Clinical
Oncology, Foundation Akbaraly, Madagascar, Help the
Hospices, Indian Association of Palliative Care, International
Association for Hospice & Palliative Care, Japanese Society of
Medical Oncology, Latin American and Caribbean Society of
Medical Oncology, Latin American Association for Palliative
Care, Malaysian Oncology Society, Middle East Cancer

Consortium, Multinational Association of Supportive
Care in Cancer, Myanmar Oncology Society, Open Society
Foundations, Worldwide Palliative Care Alliance.
2. Sources: Prices obtained from the April 9, 2014, Survey
of Drug Acquisition Costs Paid by Retail Community
Pharmacies, http://www.medicaid.gov/Medicaid-CHIP
-Program-Information/By-Topics/Benefits/Prescription
-Drugs/Survey-of-Retail-Prices.html. Equivalent daily
doses are based on data provided by the Ventura County
Health Care Agency, http://www.vchca.org/docs/hospitals
/fentanyl-patch-protocol-(1).pdf?sfvrsn=0.
3. http://hospicecare.com/resources/palliative-care-essentials
/iahpc-essential-medicines-for-palliative-care.

REFERENCES
Amery, J., C. J. Rose, J. Holmes, J. Nguyen, and C. Byarugaba.
2009. “The Beginnings of Children’s Palliative Care in
Africa: Evaluation of a Children’s Palliative Care Service
in Africa.” Journal of Palliative Medicine 12 (11): 1015–21.
Brennan, F., D. B. Carr, and M. Cousins. 2007. “Pain Management:
A Fundamental Human Right.” Anesthesia and Analgesia 105
(1): 205–21. doi:10.1213/01.ane.0000268145.52345.55.
Cherny, N. I., J. Baselga, F. de Conno, and L. Radbruch.
2010. “Formulary Availability and Regulatory Barriers to
Accessibility of Opioids for Cancer Pain in Europe: A
Report from the ESMO/EAPC Opioid Policy Initiative.”
Annals of Oncology 21 (3): 615–26. doi:10.1093/annonc
/mdp581.
Cherny, N. I., J. Cleary, W. Scholten, L. Radbruch, and J. Torode.
2013. “The Global Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI) Project to
Evaluate the Availability and Accessibility of Opioids for the
Management of Cancer Pain in Africa, Asia, Latin America
and the Caribbean, and the Middle East: Introduction and
Methodology.” Annals of Oncology 24 (Suppl. 11): xi7–13.
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdt498.
Clark, D., M. Wright, J. Hunt, and T. Lynch. 2007. “Hospice
and Palliative Care Development in Africa: A Multi-Method
Review of Services and Experiences.” Journal of Pain and
Symptom Management 33 (6): 698–710. doi:http://dx.doi
.org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2006.09.033.
Cleary, J. F., and P. P. Carbone. 1997. “Palliative Medicine in the
Elderly.” Cancer 80 (7): 1335–47. http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih
.gov/pubmed/9317188.
Cleary, J., L. De Lima, J. Eisenchlas, L. Radbruch, J. Torode,
and others. 2013. “Formulary Availability and Regulatory
Barriers to Accessibility of Opioids for Cancer Pain in Latin
America and the Caribbean: A Report from the Global
Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI).” Annals of Oncology 24
(Suppl. 11): xi41–50. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdt502.
Cleary, J., R. A. Powell, G. Munene, F. N. Mwangi-Powell,
E. Luyirika, and others. 2013. “Formulary Availability and
Regulatory Barriers to Accessibility of Opioids for Cancer
Pain in Africa: A Report from the Global Opioid Policy
Initiative (GOPI).” Annals of Oncology 24 (Suppl. 11):
xi14–23. doi:10.1093/annonc/mdt499.

Cancer Pain Relief

171

Cleary, J., L. Radbruch, J. Torode, and N. I. Cherny. 2013.
“Next Steps in Access and Availability of Opioids for the
Treatment of Cancer Pain: Reaching the Tipping Point?”
Annals of Oncology 24 (Suppl. 11): xi60–64. doi:10.1093
/annonc/mdt504.
Cleeland, C. S., J. L. Ladinsky, R. C. Serlin, and N. C. Thuy.
1988. “Multidimensional Measurement of Cancer Pain:
Comparisons of US and Vietnamese Patients.” Journal of Pain
and Symptom Management 3 (1): 23–27. http://linkinghub
.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/0885392488901340?showall=true.
Cleeland, C. S., Y. Nakamura, T. R. Mendoza, K. R. Edwards,
J. Douglas, and others. 1996. “Dimensions of the Impact of
Cancer Pain in a Four Country Sample: New Information
from Multidimensional Scaling.” Pain 67 (2–3): 267–73.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/0304-3959(96)03131-4.
Daut, R. L., and C. S. Cleeland. 1982. “The Prevalence and
Severity of Pain in Cancer.” Cancer 50 (9): 1913–18.
De Lima, L., and D. Doyle. 2007. “The International
Association for Hospice and Palliative Care List of
Essential Medicines for Palliative Care.” Journal of Pain and
Palliative Care Pharmacotherapy 21 (3): 29–36. doi:10.1080
/J354v21n03_05.
De Lima, L., T. Pastrana, L. Radbruch, and R. Wenk. 2014.
“Cross-Sectional Pilot Study to Monitor the Availability,
Dispensed Prices, and Affordability of Opioids around
the Globe.” Journal of Pain and Symptom Management.
doi:10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2013.12.237.
Ferlay, J., H.-R. Shin, F. Bray, D. Forman, C. Mathers, and
others. 2010. “Estimates of Worldwide Burden of Cancer in
2008: GLOBOCAN 2008.” International Journal of Cancer
127 (12): 2893–917. doi:10.1002/ijc.25516.
Foley, K. 1979. “Pain Syndromes in Patients with Cancer.” In
Advances in Pain Research and Therapy, edited by K. Foley,
J. Bonica, and V. Ventafridda, 59–75. New York: Raven
Press.
———. 1999. “Pain Assessment and Cancer Pain Syndromes.”
In Oxford Textbook of Palliative Medicine, 2nd ed., edited by
D. Doyle, G. Hank, and N. MacDonald, 310–31. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Foley, K., and H. Gelband. 2001. Improving Palliative Care for
Cancer. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Foley, K. M., J. L. Wagner, D. E. Joranson, and H. Gelband.
2006. “Pain Control for People with Cancer and AIDS.”
In Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd
ed., edited by D. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham,
G. Alleyne, M. Claeson,D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and
P. Musgrove, 981–93. Washington, DC: Oxford University
Press and World Bank.
García-Pérez, L., R. Linertová, R. Martín-Olivera, P. SerranoAguilar, and M. A. Benítez-Rosario. 2009. “A Systematic
Review of Specialised Palliative Care for Terminal Patients:
Which Model Is Better?” Palliative Medicine 23 (1): 17–22.
doi:10.1177/0269216308099957.
Gilson, A. M., M. A. Maurer, V. T. LeBaron, K. M. Ryan, and
J. F. Cleary. 2013. “Multivariate Analysis of Countries’
Government and Health-Care System Influences on Opioid

172

Cancer

Availability for Cancer Pain Relief and Palliative Care:
More Than a Function of Human Development.” Palliative
Medicine 27 (2): 105–14. doi:10.1177/0269216312461973.
Gwyther, L., F. Brennan, and R. Harding. 2009. “Advancing
Palliative Care as a Human Right.” Journal of Pain and
Symptom Management 38 (5): 767–74. doi:10.1016/j
.jpainsymman.2009.03.003.
HAU (Hospice Africa Uganda). 2013. Hospice Africa Uganda
Annual Report 2012–2013. Kampala: HAU.
INCB (International Narcotics Control Board). 1961. Single
Convention on Narcotic Drugs, 1961. http://www.incb.org
/incb/en/narcotic-drugs/1961_Convention.html.
International Pain Summit of the International Association
for the Study of Pain. 2011. “Declaration of Montréal:
Declaration that Access to Pain Management Is a
Fundamental Human Right.” Journal of Pain and Palliative
Care Pharmacotherapy 25 (1): 29–31. doi:10.3109/1536028
8.2010.547560.
Lohman, D., R. Schleifer, and J. J. Amon. 2010. “Access to
Pain Treatment as a Human Right.” BMC Medicine 8: 8.
doi:10.1186/1741-7015-8-8.
Lynch, T., S. Connor, and D. Clark. 2013. “Mapping Levels of
Palliative Care Development: A Global Update.” Journal of
Pain and Symptom Management 45 (6): 1094–106. http://
dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.jpainsymman.2012.05.011.
Miaskowski, C., J. Cleary, R. Burney, P. Coyne, R. Finley, and
others. 2005. Guidelines for the Management of Cancer
Pain in Adults and Children. Glenview, IL: American Pain
Society.
Morrison, R. S., and D. E. Meier. 2011. “The National Palliative
Care Research Center and the Center to Advance Palliative
Care: A Partnership to Improve Care for Persons with
Serious Illness and Their Families.” Journal of Pediatric
Hematology/Oncology 33 (Suppl. 2): S126–31. doi:10.1097
/MPH.0b013e318230dfa.
National Cancer Institute. 2009. SEER Cancer Statistics Review
1975–2010. National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD.
http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2010/browse_csr.php
?sectionSEL=2&pageSEL=sect_02_table.09.html.
Seya, M.-J., S. F. A. M. Gelders, O. U. Achara, B. Milani, and
W. K. Scholten. 2011. “A First Comparison between the
Consumption of and the Need for Opioid Analgesics at
Country, Regional, and Global Levels.” Journal of Pain and
Palliative Care Pharmacotherapy 25 (1): 6–18. doi:10.3109
/15360288.2010.536307.
Simoens, S., B. Kutten, E. Keirse, P. Berghe, P. Vanden, and others. 2010. “The Costs of Treating Terminal Patients.” Journal
of Pain and Symptom Management 40 (3): 436–48. http://
linkinghub.elsevier.com/retrieve/pii/S0885392410003635
?showall=true.
Sloan, F. A., and H. Gelband. 2007. Cancer Control
Opportunities in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: Cancer
Control. Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
http://books .google.com/books?hl=en&amp;lr=&amp
;id=rJ6LAD7l8nMC&amp;oi=fnd&amp;pg=PA1&amp;dq
=Cancer+Control+Opportunities+in+Low-+and+Middle

+income+countries&amp;ots=IypmpWQGQf&amp;sig=1
DGx__xZ_SLYTB5fxNsRS2TI1PM.
Stjernsward, J., and D. Clark. 2003. “Palliative Medicine:
A Global Perspective.” In Oxford Textbook of Palliative
Medicine, 3rd ed., edited by D. Doyle, G. Hanks, and
N. I. Cherny, 1199–222. New York: Oxford University
Press.
WHO (World Health Organization). 1986. Cancer Pain Relief.
Geneva: WHO.
———. 1990. Cancer Pain Relief and Palliative Care. Report of
a WHO expert committee. Geneva: WHO.

———. 2000. Achieving Balance in National Opioids Control
Policy: Guidelines for Assessment. Geneva: WHO. http://
apps.who.int/iris/bitstream/10665/66496/1/WHO_EDM
_QSM_2000.4.pdf?ua=1.
———. 2011. “WHO Model List of Essential Medicines.” 17th
ed., WHO, Geneva.
———. 2013a. Draft Comprehensive Global Monitoring
Framework and Targets for the Prevention and Control of
Noncommunicable Diseases. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2013b. “WHO Model List of Essential Medicines.”
18th ed., WHO, Geneva.

Cancer Pain Relief

173

Chapter

10

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of
Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes
Prabhat Jha, Mary MacLennan, Frank. J. Chaloupka, Ayda
Yurekli, Chintanie Ramasundarahettige, Krishna Palipudi,
Witold Zatońksi, Samira Asma, and Prakash C. Gupta

INTRODUCTION
Tobacco use kills approximately five million people
annually worldwide, accounting for over 20 percent
of all deaths of adult men and 5 percent of deaths of
adult women. As death rates from causes not attributed to tobacco are falling, the proportion of all adult
deaths due to smoking will rise. In the 20th century,
100 million tobacco deaths occurred; nearly 70 percent
were in high-income countries (HICs) and the former socialist economies of Europe. In contrast, in the
21st century, tobacco is expected to kill about one billion
people, mostly in low- and middle-income countries
(LMICs).
Widespread use of a few powerful interventions
affecting tobacco price, information, and regulations
could prevent tens of millions of premature deaths over
the next few decades.
This chapter starts with the epidemiology of
smoking-related diseases, focusing on contemporary
estimates of the hazards of smoking and the benefits of
cessation, and then describes current and future smoking patterns, including the rapid emergence of electronic
cigarettes. We next turn to interventions to rapidly
raise cessation rates in LMICs, in particular, higher
excise taxes on tobacco products. We discuss the costeffectiveness, cost-benefit, and poverty considerations

of tobacco control and conclude by reviewing the current state of global tobacco control implementation.

EPIDEMIOLOGY OF SMOKING-ATTRIBUTABLE
DISEASES
Approximately 1.3 billion people smoke worldwide; over
80 percent of smokers reside in LMICs. Smoked tobacco
accounts for about 97 percent of all tobacco sales globally (Euromonitor International 2013), mostly in the
form of cigarettes, or in the case of South Asia, in the
form of bidis, which typically contain about one-fourth
as much tobacco as cigarettes. Inhaling tobacco smoke
causes a greater diversity and incidence of disease than
chewing tobacco. Active smoking is also more hazardous
than exposure to secondhand smoke, although secondhand smoke contributes significantly to some diseases
(IARC 2004).
Substantial Delay from Smoking Uptake to Excess
Mortality
After smoking becomes common in a population of
young adults, it may take more than half a century to
assess reliably the full risks of mortality (Jha and Peto
2014). Five recent studies in Japan, the United Kingdom,

Corresponding author: Prabhat Jha, Center for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s Hospital and Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of Toronto,
Prabhat.Jha@utoronto.ca.

175

and the United States have examined large populations
of men and women who began to smoke regularly when
they were young and never quit. These five studies find
a twofold to threefold increased risk of death among
smokers, leading to a reduction in lifespan of at least one
decade (Doll and others 2004; Jha, Ramasundarahettige,
and others 2013; Pirie and others 2013; Sakata and
others 2012; Thun and others 2013). The same studies
included individuals who quit smoking. Those who
stopped before age 40 avoided about 90 percent of the
excess risk of death of those who continued. Smokers
who do not start in early adult life have much smaller
hazards in middle and old age. Table 10.1 summarizes
the main findings for individuals, and figure 10.1 shows
the risks by gender for Japan, the United Kingdom,
and the United States, as well as comparable risks among
men who smoke cigarettes in India.
Men born in the United Kingdom in the first quarter
of the 20th century were the first major population to
smoke regularly from early adult life; by 1970, the nation
had the highest tobacco-attributable death rates in the
world (Peto and others 1992). Sir Richard Doll’s study
of doctors born during the first half of the 20th century
and followed for the second half showed a 10-year loss
of life expectancy among those who continued to smoke
(figure 10.1).
For women, smoking became common later in the
United Kingdom and the United States, beginning
with women born in the 1940s and 1950s. The full
risks in women have been measured only early in the
21st century. By the 1980s, the lung cancer risk ratio
in men who smoked versus men who never smoked

rose substantially from 12-fold in the 1960s to 24-fold
in the 1980s; it stabilized at 25-fold in the 2000s. By
contrast, the risks of lung cancer for women who smoked
versus never-smokers rose later (Thun and others 2013).
In the 1960s, it was threefold; in the 1980s, 13-fold; and
in the 2000s, 26-fold (with similar ratios in women in
the United Kingdom in the 2000s). This is because the
typical 60-year-old female smoker in the United States
in the 2000s had smoked since early adult years, whereas
those who were smokers in the 1960s had not.
Cancer and Other Diseases Caused by Smoking
More than two-thirds of the 47 million deaths among
adults over age 25 years worldwide in 2012 were caused
by cancer, vascular and respiratory diseases, and tuberculosis (WHO 2013a). Because smoking causes many of
these diseases, overall mortality from smoking—rather
than cause-specific mortality—is increasingly used as
a measure of total smoking risk (U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services 2014). About 50 percent of
the current five million smoking-related deaths worldwide occur in LMICs, and about 80 percent of these
smoking deaths occur in men, but this is chiefly because
of the lag in women’s uptake of smoking.
In 2012, 14 million new cases of cancer were diagnosed
and about eight million cancer deaths occurred worldwide. Over 30 percent of the cancer deaths in middle-aged
men and about 10 percent of those in women are due to
smoking (Ferlay and others 2013). Smoking accounted for
the vast majority of the 1.6 million deaths from lung cancer in 2012 (1.1 million in men and 0.5 million in women).

Table 10.1 Three Main Implications for Individuals Who Become Cigarette Smokers in Adolescence or Early
Adult Life
1. The risk is big, if they continue smoking.
• Continued smoking eventually kills at least half of men and women who smoke. Among persistent cigarette smokers, whether men or women,
the overall relative risk of death throughout middle age and well into old age is at least twofold higher than otherwise similar never-smokers.
Among smokers of a given age, more than half of those who die in the near future would not have done so at never-smoker death rates.
• On average, smokers lose at least one decade of life. This average combines a zero loss for those not killed by tobacco with the loss of much
more than one decade for those who are killed by it.
2. At least half of those killed are middle aged (ages 30–69 years), losing many years of life.
• Some of those killed in middle age might have died anyway, but others might have lived on for another 10, 20, 30, or more years.
• On average, those killed in middle age lose about 20 years of never-smoker life expectancy.
3. Stopping smoking works to reduce health risks.
• Those who stop before age 40 avoid more than 90 percent of the excess risk among those who continue to smoke. Those who stop before
age 30 avoid nearly all of the smokers’ excess risk.
• Those who have smoked cigarettes since early adult life but stop at 30, 40, 50, or 60 years of age gain, respectively, about 10, 9, 6, and 4
years of life expectancy, compared with those who continue smoking.
Sources: Doll and others 2004; Jha, Ramasundarahettige, and others 2013; Pirie and others 2013; Sakata and others 2012; Thun and others 2013.

176

Cancer

Figure 10.1 Loss of a Decade of Life among Current Cigarette Smokers versus Never-Smokers Who Are Middle Aged: Men
and Women in the United Kingdom and the United States, Men in Japan, and Men in India
b. UK Women
Percentage of survival from age 35

Percentage of survival from age 35

a. UK Men
100
Never-smokers
80
60
Current smokers
40

10
years

20
0
30

40

50

60

70

100

Never-smokers

80

30

40

Percentage of survival from age 25

Percentage of survival from age 25

12 years

40
20
0
60

70

100

Never-smokers

80
Current smokers

60

20
0

80

30

40

Percentage of survival from age 35

Percentage of survival from age 35

80
Current smokers

9
years

40
20
0
40

50

60

60

70

80

f. Indian Men
Never-smokers

30

50

Age (years)

e. Japanese Men

60

11 years

40

Age (years)

100

70

d. US Women

Current smokers

50

50

Age (years)

80

40

80

0

80

Never-smokers

30

60

20

c. US Men

60

10
years

40

Age (years)

100

Current smokers
60

70

100
Never-smokers

80
60

Age (years)

9
years

50

70

40
20
0
30

80

Current smokers

40

60

80

Age (years)

Sources: Data adapted from various studies. Men in the United Kingdom: Doll and others 2004; women in the United Kingdom: Pirie and others 2013; men and women in the
United States: Jha Ramasundarahettige, and others 2013; men in Japan: Sakata and others 2012; men in India: Jha and others 2008.

The International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
cancer registry data reveal that the age-standardized
mortality rate from lung cancer is highest in men in
Europe, Northern America, Australia/New Zealand, and
Japan and lower in LMICs, reflecting the long duration of
smoking in the former populations and earlier age of initiation. Men in LMICs have not yet smoked for prolonged

periods, and the lung cancer incidence and mortality rates
are accordingly lower.
However, where reliably measured, the proportion
of cancer deaths due to smoking is substantial in
LMICs. In China, smoking caused about 40 percent of
cancer deaths in men and 20 percent in women ages
35 or older in 2010 (Chen and others, forthcoming).

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

177

In India, smoking caused about 32 percent and
6 percent of cancer deaths at ages 30–69 years in men
and women, respectively, in 2010. Smoking appears to
have a synergistic effect on the chronic viral infections
that cause liver and cervical cancers.
Smoking causes about three times as many noncancer
deaths as it does cancer deaths. Cardiovascular disease is
the leading cause of smoking-attributable deaths worldwide (Jha 2009). Smoking is a significant risk factor for
fatal and nonfatal heart attack and stroke. In HICs, about
one-half of the male and one-third of the female deaths
at ages 35–69 years from chronic lung disease are due to
smoking. In China, chronic lung disease accounted for
a quarter of all tobacco deaths among men and women
in 2010 (Chen and others, forthcoming). Among those
ages 30–69 years in India in 2010, over 30 percent of
deaths among men and 10 percent of deaths among
women from chronic lung disease were due to smoking.
Increased risks of tuberculosis death and nonfatal
tuberculosis among smokers have been observed in countries where tuberculosis remains common, most notably,
in India. In India, nearly 40 percent of tuberculosis
deaths among middle-aged males—about 120,000 deaths
annually—are attributable to smoking. Tuberculosis is
the leading cause of smoking deaths in rural areas;
acute heart attack is the leading cause in urban areas.
Subclinical infection with the tubercle bacillus is widespread, and smoking appears to facilitate the progression
from silent to active clinical disease. Thus, smoking might
contribute to the spread of tuberculosis (Gajalakshmi
and others 2003; Jha and others 2008).
Effects of Cessation on Total Mortality in Individuals
and Populations
Large numbers of adult males and fewer adult females
have quit smoking in HICs, providing the opportunity
to study the effect of quitting at various ages on subsequent mortality. The results of various studies indicate a
90 percent reduction in the excess risk of death among
those who quit smoking by age 40; for those quitting by
age 30, the benefit approaches the rates of never-smokers
(figure 10.2, panel a) (Jha, Ramasundarahettige, and
others 2013). The benefits of cessation are remarkably
similar in studies in Japan, the United Kingdom, and the
United States (table 10.1).
The large individual benefits of smoking cessation
translate into major reductions in smoking-attributable
deaths from all causes and from cancer in the overall
population. In the United Kingdom, there are now
twice as many ex-smokers as current smokers over age
50. Reliable indirect methods (Peto and others 2012)
to calculate tobacco-attributable deaths demonstrate

178

Cancer

a substantial reduction. Smoking-attributable deaths
at ages 35–69 years in men declined by three-quarters
from 1970 to 2010 (from 70,000 to 16,000 deaths). Men
who died in 1970 had begun smoking between 1920 and
1940, near the peak of the smoking rate, when cessation
was uncommon. The decline was caused by fewer men
beginning to smoke from 1950 to 1970; a substantial
proportion of this cohort ultimately quit smoking.
The cancer and all-cause death rates from smoking
among women in the United Kingdom and the United
States peaked much later, around 1995, and they have
since reached a plateau. Similar declines have been seen
in the proportion of all deaths due to tobacco. Notably,
cancer death rates due to smoking have fallen substantially in men and have not risen in women. Death rates
from cancers not caused by smoking have declined, due
in part to screening and treatment of common cancers
(Gelband and others 2015).
Comparably High Mortality Risks from Smoking
Emerging in LMICs
Cigarette smoking rose substantially among men in
many HICs in the first few decades of the 20th century
and subsequently increased in women in most HICs and
men in LMICs. Currently, there are about 1.3 billion
smokers worldwide (Giovino and others 2012), although
slightly lower estimates have been proposed (Ng and
others 2014). A simple formula is that every metric
tonne of tobacco produces about one million cigarettes,
which leads to one death (Jha and Peto 2014).
The magnitude of the tobacco epidemic in a given
country depends on the average daily consumption of
cigarettes or bidis, which is generally lower in LMICs
than in HICs; in India, about 80 percent of current
smoking is of the lower-risk bidis, but these are being
replaced by higher-risk cigarettes (Jha and others 2011).
Relative to nonsmokers in India, male bidi smokers lose
roughly six years, female bidi smokers lose about eight
years, and male cigarette smokers lose about 10 years
of life. The 10-year loss of life among Indian male cigarette smokers is about as extreme as that in the recent
studies noted, despite the fact that Indian men smoke
fewer cigarettes per day and start later in life than do
men in HICs. The age at starting smoking is generally
later in LMICs than HICs. Urban Chinese men, however, have begun to start as young as men in the United
States (Chen and others, forthcoming). If similar shifts
to smoking at younger ages occur in India and other
populations, the eventual hazards of smoking might
well be greater. Epidemiological studies have confirmed
the elevated age-specific, smoking-attributable risks in
Bangladesh (Alam and others 2013); China, and Hong

Figure 10.2 Effect of Smoking Cessation on Survival at Various Ages, Men and Women, United States, 2006–12
a. Quitting at ages 25–34

b. Quitting at ages 35–44
100
Never-smokers

80
60

10 years
gained

Current smokers

Quitters

40
20

Percentage survival from age 40

Percentage survival from age 30

100

0

Never-smokers
80
60

Quitters

40
20
0

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

30

40

50

60

70

80

90

Age (years)

Age (years)
c. Quitting at ages 45–54

d. Quitting at ages 55–64

100

100

80
6 years
gained

60
Current smokers
40

Quitters

20

Percentage survival from age 60

Never-smokers
Percentage survival from age 50

9 years
gained

Current smokers

Never-smokers

80
4 years
gained

60
Current smokers
40

Quitters

20
0

0
30

40

50

60
70
Age (years)

80

90

30

40

50

60
70
Age (years)

80

90

Source: Adapted from Jha, Ramasundarahettige, and others 2013.

Kong SAR, China (Gu and others 2009; Chen and
others, forthcoming; Lam and others 1997); India (Jha
and others 2008); and South Africa (Sitas and others
2013). Accordingly, the future mortality risks from
2010 to 2050 in many LMICs might be greater than
those from 1940 to 1980 in the United Kingdom or the
United States.
Overall global death rates have fallen sharply over
the past four decades, particularly from 2000 to 2010
(Norheim and others 2014). Greater declines have been
seen in childhood and infectious diseases than for diseases made more common by tobacco. Hence, while it
is certain that tobacco will account for an increasing
proportion of a falling overall total of premature deaths
before age 70 years, the future projections of the absolute
total from tobacco use are less certain.
Sir Richard Peto estimated that global tobacco
deaths will total about 450 million between 2000

and 2050 (Peto and Lopez 2001). Further estimations
are more uncertain, but based on current initiation
and cessation rates and projected population growth,
from 2050 to 2100, there would be, conservatively, an
additional 550 million tobacco deaths, an average of
10 million deaths per year. Of the estimated one billion
smoking-attributable deaths in this century, most will
be in LMICs. In contrast, there were “only” 100 million
tobacco deaths in the 20th century, mostly among
those born before or around World War II in HICs
and Eastern Europe. Already, 80–90 million smoking
deaths will have occurred from 2000 to 2015. Peto’s
estimates of 50–60 million smoking deaths from 2000
to 2010 and about 400 million tobacco-attributable
deaths from 2010 to 2050 remain plausible. Indeed,
the chief uncertainty is not if tobacco deaths will reach
about 10 million a year, but when, with the most likely
scenario around 2030 to 2035 (Peto and Lopez 2001).

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

179

SMOKING AND CESSATION PATTERNS
WORLDWIDE
The epidemiological data on the consequences of smoking help predict, with reasonable certainty, that deaths
from smoking will be high in LMICs unless current
smokers quit and potential new smokers do not start.
This section reviews the statistics on current smoking
and cessation across countries.
Current Smoking
The overall global volume of legal cigarette sales rose
from 5.1 trillion in 1990 to 5.9 trillion in 2012, largely
due to population growth. Although per-person consumption has fallen worldwide, it has risen in many
LMICs (Euromonitor International 2013). About
80 percent of the 1.3 billion smokers age 15 years or
older in the world live in LMICs; over half reside in
eight regions or countries—Bangladesh, Brazil, China,
the European Union, India, Indonesia, the Russian
Federation, and the United States (table 10.2). The threefold hazards of lifelong smoking can be applied reliably
to the cohort of roughly 620 million younger current
and would-be smokers in selected countries. This application suggests that at least half, over 300 million, of this
cohort will be killed by smoking unless they quit.
The Global Adult Tobacco Survey, of people ages
15 years and older in selected countries, indicates that
the proportion of males who smoke ranges from over
67 percent in Indonesia to about 7 percent in Nigeria. In
most LMICs, male smoking is far more common than
female smoking. Among adult women, for example,
the proportion of smokers ranges from 24 percent in
Poland to less than 1 percent in Nigeria (Giovino and
others 2012).
Smoking Cessation Patterns
To determine smoking prevalence in a population,
individuals are divided into three categories: current
smokers, ex-smokers, and never-smokers. Ex-smoking
prevalence is a good measure of cessation at a population level. An increase in cessation, along with an
increasing proportion of never-smokers, reduced adult
smoking prevalence in the United Kingdom between
1950 and 2005, from 70 percent to 25 percent in men
and from 40 percent to 20 percent in women. In the
United States, among men ages 60–64, there are about
four times as many ex-smokers as current smokers (Jha,
Ramasundarahettige, and others 2013). Similar rates of
cessation have been reported in most HICs.
The prevalence of male ex-smoking in LMICs is
much lower. Even reported figures may be misleadingly

180

Cancer

high because they include people who quit either
because they are too ill to continue smoking or
because of early symptoms of tobacco-attributable
illness, such as respiratory disease. A good measure
of the success of tobacco control is a rising proportion of adults quitting in middle age (ages 45–64)
when they can expect personal gains in health. In the
European Union and the United States, where cessation has become common, about as many adults
in this age group are former smokers as are current
smokers. About 60 percent of all ex-smokers reside
in HICs. By contrast, most LMICs, except Brazil, have
far fewer former than current smokers at these ages.
Cessation among women continues to lag men in
nearly every country.

INTERVENTIONS TO RAISE CESSATION
RATES RAPIDLY
Cessation by today’s smokers is the only practicable
way to avoid a substantial proportion of tobacco deaths
worldwide before 2050. Halving the worldwide per
capita adult consumption of tobacco by 2025 (akin to
the declines in adult smoking in the United Kingdom
over the past three decades) would prevent approximately 160 million to 180 million tobacco deaths over
the next few decades. In contrast, halving the percentage of children who become prolonged smokers (from
about 30 percent to 15 percent over two decades) would
prevent 20 million deaths over the next few decades; its
main effect would be to lower mortality rates by 2050
and beyond (Jha and Chaloupka 1999; Peto and Lopez
2001). Table 10.3 summarizes the effectiveness of the
major interventions.
Tobacco Taxation
Aggressive taxation is the key strategy for LMICs to
reduce smoking at a rate faster than that achieved by
HICs. Tobacco taxes and consumption are strongly
inversely related worldwide. Well over 100 studies
demonstrate a strong negative relationship between
cigarette pricing and consumption (Chaloupka, Yurekli,
and Fong 2012; Jha and Chaloupka 1999). We review five
key aspects of smart taxation:
• Price elasticity of demand for tobacco
• Affordability, the relationship of price to income
growth
• Importance of smart tax structure, including excise
taxes
• Implementation experience of large tax increases
• Signaling of prices to consumers.

Table 10.2 Prevalence and Number of Current and Future Smokers below age 35 and Expected Deaths,
Selected Countries
Current smoking prevalence, ages
15+ (percent)
Current and future
smokers, ages
0–34 (millions)

Approximate number
of deaths in current
and future smokers
ages <35, unless
smokers quit

193

97

Male

Female

Total

Current
smokers, ages
15+ (millions)

a

China (2010)

53

2

28

317

a

India (2009)

24

3

14

122

95

48

EU-28 (2012)b

32

22

27

115

54

27

67

3

35

61

58

29

22

17

20

50

26

13

Russian Federation (2008)

60

22

39

47

32

16

Brazil (2008)a

22

13

17

26

19

10

a

Bangladesh (2009)

45

2

23

25

25

13

a

Philippines (2008)

48

9

28

18

22

11

Turkey (2008)a

48

15

31

17

18

9

Vietnam (2010)

47

1

24

17

14

7

a

Mexico (2009)

25

8

16

14

14

7

Thailand (2009)a

46

3

24

13

8

4

50

11

29

11

8

4

Country

Indonesia (2011)a
c

United States (2011)

a

a

a

Ukraine (2010)

a

Egypt, Arab Rep. (2009)

38

1

19

11

12

6

Argentina (2012)a

29

24

22

7

7

4

Canada (2011)d

20

16

17

5

2

1

Malaysia (2011)

44

15

23

5

5

3

Nigeria (2012)a

7

1

4

4

6

3

170

~80

~40

a

Subtotal (HICs)
Subtotal (LMICs)

715

~540

~270

Total

885

~620

~310

Note: For future smokers in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), we apply the smoking prevalence at ages 25–34 from the Global Adult Tobacco Survey to the United Nations
2012 population under age 25 years, plus current smokers at ages 25–34. For future smokers in high-income countries (HICs), we apply the smoking prevalence at ages 18–24 or
20–24 to the under-25 population, with an assumed 1 percent annual decline due to decreased uptake in these countries.
a. WHO-GATS, various years, various Country Reports.
b. EU-28: Zatoński and others 2012, ages 18+.
c. United States: Centers for Disease Control and Prevention 2009–11, ages 18+.
d. Canada: Health Canada 2012, ages 15+.

Price Elasticity of Demand for Tobacco
Raising tobacco taxes to achieve a 50 percent increase
in tobacco prices decreases consumption by about
20 percent in HICs and by at least as much in most
LMICs (that is, price elasticity of −0.4). Price elasticity
estimates vary more in LMICs than in HICs, ranging
from −0.15 to −0.9, but most studies find results to be
concentrated in the −0.20 to −0.60 range. In theory,
people in LMICs should be more sensitive to price and
nonprice tobacco control interventions because the cost

of cigarettes constitutes a larger relative proportion of
income. However, in China and Russia, price elasticity
estimates are closer to zero, in part due to a rapid rise in
affordability.
Half or more of the effect of prices on demand results
from increased quitting; the remaining effect results
from reducing the amount of tobacco smoked. Higher
taxes increase the number of attempts to quit smoking
and the success of those attempts; in the United States,
a 10 percent increase in price results in 11–13 percent

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

181

Table 10.3 Interventions and Their Effectiveness in Reducing Tobacco Consumption
Intervention

Effectiveness

Large, regular increases in excise taxes that reduce affordability

50 percent higher prices reduce consumption by approximately
20 percent (10 percent quit, 10 percent reduce the amount
smoked)

Mass media counter-advertising; warning labels; plain packaging; and
epidemiological studies, such as deaths from smoking on death records

Not quantified but does increase cessation rates

Complete bans on tobacco advertising, promotion, and sponsorship

Reduces consumption by approximately 15 percent in LMICs

Complete ban on smoking in public places, including workplaces

Reduces consumption by 3–14 percent

Cessation support for smokers, brief medical advice, pharmacotherapy

At six months unaided cessation is about 2–5 percent; brief
medical advice doubles the quit rates (to 4–8 percent);
medications triple the quit rates (to 8–12 percent)

Antismuggling technologies: local language labels, improved tax
administration, and increased customs and international efforts to target
smuggling

10 percent higher spending on antismuggling efforts reduces
smuggling by 5 percent and consumption by 2 percent

shorter smoking duration, or a 3 percent higher probability of cessation (Tauras 1999). Recent analyses of the
Global Adult Tobacco Survey data and the Global Youth
Tobacco Survey find that cessation is generally price
inelastic, but it is still significantly positively related to
price, while initiation is generally price elastic (Kostova
and others 2011; Shang and others 2014).
Higher cigarette prices are particularly effective in
reducing consumption among less educated and lowerincome individuals and in preventing young smokers
from moving beyond experimentation into regular,
addicted smoking. A comprehensive study using multiple waves of the Global Youth Tobacco Survey in 17
LMICs concluded that a 50 percent increase in cigarette
prices would result in a reduction of youth prevalence
of almost 40 percent. Furthermore, the estimated price
elasticity of youth smoking was about −2.0 (Kostova and
others 2011; Nikaj and Chaloupka 2014).

growth, particularly in fast-growing countries such as
China and Vietnam.

Affordability
Affordability is a concept that captures the interaction
between consumers’ income levels and tobacco prices.
Typically, affordability is defined as per capita gross
domestic product (GDP) relative to the wholesale
price index for bidis or cigarettes. As income rises
relative to price, affordability increases. From 1990 to
2006, cigarettes became less affordable in 59 percent
of 32 HICs, but only in 38 percent of 45 LMICs.
Particularly since 2003, cigarettes in some LMICs have
quickly become more affordable. In India, bidis were
nearly three times more affordable in 2011 than in
1990, while cigarettes were about twice as affordable
(Blecher and van Walbeek 2009; Jha and others 2011).
Thus, tax policy needs to take into account income

182

Cancer

Importance of Smart Excise Tax Structure
Most LMICs have low levels of taxation; they also have
inefficient tax structures that contribute to increased
consumption. For example, China has a relatively low
price elasticity of demand for cigarettes; smokers are
likely to switch to a wide range of cheaper brands rather
than quit smoking. This low measured price elasticity
in part reflects the underlying tax structure and income
growth. Further, there are several types of taxes: excises,
which are based on quantity or weight (for example, the
tax per pack of 20 cigarettes); ad valorem taxes, which are
based on the value of tobacco products (for example, a
specific percentage of manufacturers’ prices for tobacco
products); and other taxes (for example, import duties).
Specific excise taxes are more important insofar as
they differentiate tobacco product prices from other
prices more than broader taxes do. A high reliance on
ad valorem and similar taxes by most LMICs creates
large price gaps and increases incentives to switch
to cheaper products. China, like Indonesia, uses a
complex tiered system with small specific, different
ad valorem rates that rise with the cost of cigarettes (Barber and others 2008; Hu and others 2008).
Indeed, the tobacco industry usually offers such advice
to ministries of finance to promote complex, tiered
taxation systems so as to decrease the impact of tax
increases on sales (Jha 2015)
By contrast, empirical research from HICs finds that
high uniform, specific excise taxes are more likely to
discourage switching among different types of tobacco
products, are easier to administer, and produce a steadier

a. United States
Total sales (million packs)

28,000

$3.75

26,000

$3.25

24,000

$2.75

22,000

$2.25

20,000

$1.75

Real (inflation-adjusted)
price, 2007 US dollars

$4.25

30,000

$1.25
18,000
1970 1973 1976 1979 1982 1985 1988 1991 1994 1997 2000 2003 2006
Year
Sales
b. France
300

5
200

4
3

100

2
1
0
1950

0
1960

1970

1980

1990

2000

2010

Real (inflation-adjusted) price, 1990 = 100

Price

6
Cigarettes per adult per day

Year
c. South Africa
2.5
2.0

700
600
500

1.5

400

1.0

300
200

0.5

100

0
0
1960 1970 1980 1982 1984 1986 1988 1990 1992 1994 1996 1998 2000
Year
Consumption
Price

Real (inflation-adjusted) price, 1990 = 100

Implementation of Large Tax Increases
Powerful policy interventions to tax and regulate consumption and to inform consumers have reduced consumption in most HICs. The United Kingdom and the
United States each took about 35 years, and Canada
about 25 years, to halve per adult cigarette consumption, from about 10 to about five per adult per day
(Forey and others 2013). However, France took only
15 years to halve consumption. France’s uptake of
smoking was chiefly after World War II, and its prevalence rose until the mid-1980s. From 1990 to 2005,
cigarette consumption fell from about six cigarettes
per adult per day to three (figure 10.3). This sharp
decline was mostly due to a sharp increase in excise
tobacco taxation starting in 1990. These excise tax
increases raised the inflation-adjusted price threefold.
Among men, the corresponding lung cancer rates at
ages 35–44, which are a good measure of recent smoking in the population, fell sharply from 1997 onward.
During this period, revenues in real terms rose from
about 6 billion to 12 billion euros.
In HICs, about 64 percent of the retail price of the
most popular brands consists of the excise tax; in most
LMICs, the proportion of the excise tax is well below
50 percent (figure 10.4).
Excise taxes tend to be higher and account for a
greater share of retail prices in HICs, but LMICs are
increasing the proportion of excise tax to retail prices,
as seen in HICs. In Turkey, the excise share as a proportion of the retail price rose to 67 percent; in Thailand, it
rose to 58 percent; the rise contributed to a decline in
adult smoking prevalence rates in both countries (WHO
2013b; WHO-GATS, various years).
The Mexican government raised the tobacco excise
in 2012 (WHO 2013b). This rise contributed to an
estimated decrease in cigarette sales of 30 percent, which
may avoid about 100,000 deaths over the next 30 years
(Hernandez-Villa and others, personal communication).
In South Africa, the excise tax as a percentage of the

Figure 10.3 Inverse Relationship of Consumption and Price in the United
States, France, and South Africa, Various Years

Cigarettes per adult per day

stream of excise revenue (Chaloupka and others 2010).
The exact impact of high excises depends on market
conditions, industry efforts to counter the tax hike,
and the effectiveness of tax administration. Increases in
the specific excise tax decrease the relative differences
between higher- and lower-priced cigarettes, effectively
increasing the public health impact. The main weakness
is that such excise taxes need to be adjusted periodically
for inflation, which is often higher in LMICs than in
HICs. Thus, a complementary strategy is to raise the
excise every year in excess of inflation and income
growth to reduce affordability so that the number of
ex-smokers increases every year.

Sources: Based on data from the Tobacco Institute (United States) and personal communications
from C. Hill (France) and C. van Walbeek (South Africa).

retail price fell to about 20 percent around 1990, but it
subsequently rose to nearly 40 percent. Consumption
fell from about four to two cigarettes per adult per day.
Poland’s tax increases have doubled the real price of
cigarettes and decreased consumption. Mauritius has
raised excise taxes by about 30 percent, which has
reduced consumption. More recently, the doubling of
excise taxes in the Philippines is expected to raise the
average price by 70 percent and reduce consumption by
about 40 percent (Jha and Peto 2014).
The World Health Organization (WHO) recommends
that excise taxes account for 70 percent of the retail price

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

183

Figure 10.4 Retail Price of the Most Popular Brand and the Proportion
Due to Excise Taxes by Country Income Levels, 2012
(US$)
6

Price and taxation per pack (PPP dollar)

5
Excise tax
64%
4

3

Excise tax
39%

2

Excise tax
37%
1

0
High income

Middle income

Low income

Country income level
Excise tax per pack

Other taxes

Base price

Source: Adapted from WHO 2013b.
Note: Prices are expressed in dollars adjusted for purchasing power parity (PPP). In low- and
middle-income countries, tripling specific excise taxes on tobacco would approximately double street
prices, because non-excise taxes and retailer mark-up would also rise. In the European Union, more
complex variations of specific excise taxes on tobacco are used. Data are for 48 high-income countries,
95 middle-income countries, and 30 low-income countries.

of cigarettes and that countries raise excise levels more
than inflation levels and income growth to reach that
point (WHO 2010). Based on WHO data for the most
popular brand, achieving this level of excise would result
in the weighted price per pack rising from US$0.8 per
pack to US$1.4 in low-income countries, from U$1.5 per
pack to US$2.6 in middle-income countries, and from
US$6.3 per pack to US$10.6 in HICs. Such excise tax
increases, while large, have already been achieved in some
countries, including Canada, France, the Philippines,
Poland, and South Africa, and in some states in the
United States.
An increase in cigarette taxes of 25 and 50 percent
globally would raise cigarette tax revenues by
14 percent and 25 percent, respectively, as the fall in
demand is less than proportional to the price increase
in most countries (WHO 2013b). The overall increase
in government revenue would be about US$100 billion
(Jha and Peto 2014).

184

Cancer

Signaling the Effects of Price Increases
Tobacco consumption changes in response to
announced taxation changes (Becker, Grossman, and
Murphy 1994; Chaloupka 1991; Gruber and Köszegi
2001). For example, even the debate on a tax increase
in Switzerland, which was not adopted by popular vote, led to decreased consumption (Kenkel and
Chen 2000). There are likely two mechanisms for
this decline. The first is rational price expectations.
Consumers respond to future price expectations for
cigarettes, despite their addictive properties. Second is
the signal that governments and peers give about the
undesirability of smoking, leading people to reconsider cessation. In the United States, the higher price
responsiveness by youth has been linked in part to
peer effects, in which one quitter who might be more
responsive to price increases influences other teenagers
to do the same (Tauras and Chaloupka 2004).
Thus, governments can announce future tobacco tax
targets to decrease current and future consumption,
in much the same way that central banks announce
inflation targets. For example, Australia and New
Zealand have opted to raise tax rates to ensure that
affordability decreases. France started a similar policy
in 1991, increasing cigarette prices by 5 percent or more
in excess of inflation every year. As a result, French
ex-smoking prevalence at ages 45–64 is now well above
the European Union average (Jha 2013; Zatoński and
Mańczuk 2010).
Health Information and Counter-Advertising
With more than 40,000 studies on smoking and health
published over the past five decades, it is easy to assume
that the health consequences of tobacco are well known
worldwide (IARC 2004; U.S. Department of Health and
Human Services 2014). Although this is often the case
in HICs, even in these countries many smokers minimize the personal relevance of these risks. Awareness of
the hazards of smoking and the benefits of cessation is
much lower in most LMICs. In India, few smokers know
that 70 percent of smoking deaths occur during productive middle age or that the average number of years
of life lost from cigarette smoking is nearly 10 years.
The Global Adult Tobacco Survey revealed that only
23 percent of Chinese adults know that smoking causes
strokes, heart attacks, and lung cancer. The survey also
revealed the widespread belief in most countries that
smoking does not cause strokes: over 50 percent in India,
39 percent in Mexico, 33 percent in Russia, 30 percent in
Vietnam, and 27 percent in Brazil.
Smoking patterns in Western countries have changed
in response to control policies and increased information.

Data on tobacco hazards help build public support for
control measures, such as higher prices and bans on
advertising and promotion. A systematic review found
that nine of 11 mass media campaigns evaluated had
reduced smoking prevalence or increased cessation rates
(Bala and others 2013). Decreases in smoking prevalence
were largest in HICs, where coverage of issues related to
tobacco in the news media is consistent. For example, the
1962 report by the British Royal College of Physicians,
and the 1964 U.S. Surgeon General’s Report, in combination with the publicity that followed each publication,
reduced consumption by 4–9 percent initially, and by
15–30 percent in the longer term in both countries, and
indeed in other countries, such as Switzerland (Kenkel
and Chen 2000).
Prominent, rotating pictorial warning labels on
tobacco products are effective at portraying risks to
smokers and can reach even illiterate individuals, which
is important in countries such as India, where half the
smoking deaths occur among the uneducated. Thailand
changed the warnings from 30 percent text-only to
50 percent pictorial in 1996; subsequent surveys noted
an increase from 34 percent to 54 percent of people who
claimed that the warnings made them think about health
risks “a lot,” with 31–44 percent “a lot” more likely to
quit (International Tobacco Control Project 2009). The
impact has been similar in other countries.
In 2011, Australia became the first country to legislate plain packaging for tobacco products. Plain packaging aims to standardize the look of cigarette packages
by mandating the removal of all brand imagery,
including logos and trademarks. Manufacturers are
required to print the brand name in a required size,
font, and place and to include prominent pictorial health warnings. This goes beyond the pictorial
warning labels used in Canada and introduced in
the United States. The result is that smokers perceive
their plain-packaged cigarettes to be lower quality and
to experience lower satisfaction. Smokers were also
more likely to consider quitting (Wakefield and others
2013). Experimental research demonstrates that plain
packaging enhances the effectiveness of health warnings, helps dispel false beliefs, and reduces the appeal
of smoking (Hammond 2010).
Reliable reporting of smoking deaths is possible with
the simple addition of a smoking status question to
South Africa’s death certificates, for example, “Was the
dead person a smoker five years ago?,” which is asked
of living respondents (Sitas and others 2013). A similar strategy in India obtains the smoking status of the
deceased and the respondent during household surveys
of the causes of death (Dikshit and others 2012; Jha and
others 2008).

Bans on Advertising and Promotion
Cigarettes are among the most heavily advertised and
promoted products in the world. Cigarette companies spend over US$9 billion annually on advertising
and promotion in the United States alone, spending
has risen in recent years (Federal Trade Commission
2015). The spending in the United States is relevant
globally because it funds research and industry marketing strategies on advertisement and promotion of
cigarettes globally.
In HICs, partial bans on tobacco advertising have
had little effect on consumption, as the industry
shifts to other media, price-reducing promotions,
or sponsorship of events, such as rock concerts.
However, comprehensive bans reduce consumption
by 6–7 percent, taking into account differences in
price and nonprice control interventions. For example, complete tobacco advertising bans in Norway and
Finland reduced smoking demand by 9–16 percent
and 7 percent, respectively. Such bans may be twice
as effective in LMICs. In a study of 50 LMICs,
comprehensive bans reduced consumption by 14.4–
15.5 percent, and by about 5.5 percent in the broader
sample of 76 countries. Limited bans still had some
impact, in part because the marginal impact of bans
is greater where no or little tobacco control has
occurred (Blecher 2008).
Restrictions on Smoking in Public Places
Restrictions on smoking in public places are primarily
intended to reduce nonsmokers’ exposure to passive
tobacco smoke. However, comprehensive restrictions
in HICs also raise attempts to quit, so that overall
consumption falls by 3–4 percent. Tobacco consumption significantly decreased after laws restricting smoking were implemented in Germany, Ireland, and the
Netherlands, but not in France (Mons 2011).
According to a systematic review of studies (most
from HICs), workplace and community smoke-free
policies reduce tobacco use prevalence by a median
of 14 percent. These policies are most effective when
strong social norms help make smoking restrictions self-enforcing (IARC 2009). Reduced hospital
admissions for cardiac events and an improvement
in some health indicators consistently occur after
smoking is banned in public places. This appears to
be more related to increased cessation—in particular, among working-age adults, in whom smoking
causes a large proportion of the acute heart attacks
(Jha and others 2009)—and less related to reduced
environmental smoke exposure triggering acute
heart attacks.

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

185

Smoking Cessation Treatments
Most of the ex-smokers in the world have quit unaided.
However, unaided quit rates are only about 2–3 percent
at six months. Physician support or telephone- or
Internet-based counseling and cessation support can
increase these low rates. A systematic review noted
that Internet and mobile telephone programs roughly
doubled short- and long-term self-reported quitting
(Whittaker and others 2012). Another systematic review
from pooled data in 17 trials demonstrated a significant
increase in the rate of quitting in those who received
brief physician advice compared with no advice, increasing unaided quit rates by another 1–3 percent (Stead and
others 2013). Pharmacological treatments, including
nicotine replacement therapies, bupropion, and varenicline, further improve the likelihood of quitting, with
success rates two to three times higher than when pharmaceutical treatments are not employed (HartmannBoyce and others 2014). In addition, over-the-counter
access to such medications increases access and decreases
cost. Cytisine, a cessation drug used commonly in the
former socialist economies, was more effective than a
placebo for smoking cessation in Poland. As cytosine
is much less expensive than standard drugs, it might be
practicable in LMICs (West and others 2011).
Electronic Cigarettes
In recent years, there has been rapid development of
e-cigarettes or other noncombustible products. In the
United States, e-cigarettes are now more commonly used
than traditional cigarettes among high-school students
(National Institute of Drug Abuse 2015). In most LMICs,
these products are mostly unregulated and not subject to
traditional tobacco control policies. It remains unknown
whether these products result mostly in adult cessation, or
whether they also are significant gateway or bridge products that might increase the uptake of cigarette smoking
by youth or diminish cessation by adults. No studies have
yet reliably documented if young e-cigarette smokers
actually quit after a few years. Clinical trials confirm that
e-cigarettes, used as nicotine replacement, can raise adult
cessation rates, comparable to other nicotine replacement
products (Bullen and others 2013). Multinational tobacco
companies are expanding into the nontobacco nicotine
delivery business. However, access to e-cigarettes remains
more limited in LMICs than HICs.
Much more epidemiological and economic research is
needed in this rapidly changing field. The United States
and other high-income countries are discussing
nuanced regulation that would allow some promotion
of e-cigarettes to adults, but not for children. Bearing in

186

Cancer

mind that most LMICs have far less regulatory capacity
currently, interim policies should try to encourage cessation and avoid the pathways to use of manufactured
cigarettes. Key policies include the following: (a) restrict
advertising and promotion of e-cigarettes comparable
to comprehensive bans on cigarette advertising, even
though this is a more blunt instrument than ideally
suited to helping adult smokers quit; (b) ensure that
bans on smoking in public places also cover e-cigarettes;
and (c) ensure, as much as possible, separation of the
ownership of these companies by cigarette companies
(Jha and Peto 2014). Taxation strategies for e-cigarettes
are feasible (Huang, Tauras and Chaloupka 2014), but
would need to raise the price of cigarettes even more, so
as to encourage cessation.

Supply-Side Interventions
In contrast to the effective interventions designed
to reduce demand, scant evidence exists to indicate
that restricting supply can effectively reduce consumption. Limitation of youth access to tobacco products,
cross-border trade restrictions, and crop substitution
and diversification are largely ineffective in reducing
consumption, given that supply will always respond
to demand (Jacobs and others 2000). Recent debate
has included phasing in outright bans on sales to birth
cohorts, such as anyone born after 2000. These strategies have not yet been tested (Reuter 2013). Importantly,
most of the deaths from smoking before 2050 will occur
in current smokers, so to the extent these efforts draw
political attention away from taxation and regulation
aimed at encouraging cessation and reducing initiation,
they could be counterproductive.
However, controlling cigarette smuggling is effective. An estimated 6–11 percent of the 5.9 trillion
cigarettes sold globally in 2006—about 600 billion
cigarettes—enter the market without being taxed.
This amounts to approximately US$50 billion in lost
revenue, excess consumption, and increased deaths
(Joossens and others 2009). The main determinant of
smuggling is not price differences from different tax
regimes, but corruption, organized criminal networks,
and weak tax administration.
A common misconception by governments and policy makers is that illicit trade will increase as cigarette
taxes rise. Clearly, higher taxes increase the financial
incentives for smugglers, but these claims ignore factors
of equal or greater importance in making smuggling
attractive, such as the following: (a) weak governance
and lack of high-level commitment by governments;
(b) ineffective customs and excise administration;

(c) corruption and complicity of cigarette manufacturers; (d) presence of informal sectors and distribution
channels; and (e) population perceptions and socioeconomic status.
A study by Yurekli and Sayginsoy (2010) showed no
clear correlation between the illicit trade market and the
tax rate for the most popular cigarettes from a sample
of 76 countries. By contrast, a stronger correlation was
seen between illicit trade markets and weak governance;
countries with strong governance experience lower illicit
trade levels than those with weak governance.
In HICs, companies have been convicted in criminal
courts for encouraging smuggling. In addition to harmonizing prices among countries, effective measures
to counter smuggling include prominent tax stamps
and warning labels in local languages, better methods for tracking cigarettes through the distribution
chain, aggressive enforcement of antismuggling laws,
and stronger penalties (IARC 2011).
Spain provides a good example of effective measures
to reduce smuggling. Spain raised its investment in intelligence tenfold over five years, increased customs activity
in border areas, and developed international collaborations to target smuggling (Joossens and Raw 2008).
As a result, the market share of smuggled cigarettes fell
from 16 percent to 2 percent, and tax revenues more
than doubled, netting US$68 for every dollar spent on
smuggling control. A 10 percent increase in price, paired
with a 10 percent increase in spending on smuggling
controls, would decrease smuggling by 5 percent, reduce
consumption by 2 percent, and increase tax revenues
by nearly 8 percent (Yurekli and Sayginsoy 2010). The
Canadian government raised cigarette taxes in 2014, and
also funded US$100 million for better police enforcement against smuggling (Jha 2014). Even in the presence
of smuggling, tax increases will reduce consumption and
increase revenue. For example, South Africa saw a rise in
reported smuggling from 0 percent to 6 percent in the
years when it raised excise taxes, but revenues continued
to rise (Van Walbeek 2006).

Cardiovascular, Respiratory, Renal, and Endocrine
Disorders) on labor and capital, which determine economic output, from 2011 to 2030 (table 10.4). Using
conservative estimates attributing about 33 percent of
cardiovascular disease, about 50 percent of cancers, and
60 percent of chronic respiratory diseases to tobacco
use, the total economic loss from tobacco is expected
to be about US$12.7 trillion dollars over the next few
decades. This loss translates to about 1.3 percent of
GDP spent on tobacco-associated diseases every year,
or approximately US$0.9 trillion in 2010 terms.

COST-EFFECTIVENESS OF TOBACCO
CONTROL

Table 10.4 Economic Costs of Tobacco, 2010–30
US$ trillions

Costs
Tobacco is a major contributor to the large and
increasing global burden of noncommunicable diseases (NCDs). A recent paper uses the value of lost
output approach to estimate the impact of NCDs
on worldwide GDP (Jha, Nugent, and others 2013).
It employs the WHO’s EPIC model to simulate the
macroeconomic effects of NCDs (see DCP3 volume 5,

Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Tobacco control is highly cost-effective. Significant price
increases and comprehensive tobacco control measures
are cost-effective in all WHO regions, according to 2002
analysis of data from 2000 (table 10.5).
For 23 LMICs, an increased real price of cigarettes
to reduce smoking prevalence by 10 percent, in combination with mid-range estimates of nonprice interventions, would reduce the smoking prevalence rate
by 20 percent. Over three decades, about three million
deaths from cardiovascular disease would be averted:
two million from respiratory disease and one million
from cancer (assuming price elasticity ranges from
−0.40 to −1.20). The cost of implementation would be
US$0.04 to US$0.32 per person, which would be largely,
if not completely, offset by the increased revenue from
the tax (Asaria and others 2007).
A US$0.50 increase in the tax on cigarettes and small
cigars, keeping pace with inflation and the growth of
people’s income, would reduce the federal budget deficit
in the United States by about US$42 billion through 2021
(Baumgardner and others 2012). Tax revenues would be
higher and spending on Medicare slightly lower, although
spending on Social Security would rise slightly as more
people would live longer. Even in the long run, there
would be a net positive budgetary impact, given that the
higher revenues from the tax would exceed any increase

Region/disease

Vascular

Cancer

Chronic
lung

Total

Total due
to tobacco

Low and middleincome countries

9

5

2

16

7

High-income
countries

7

3

3

13

6

World

16

8

5

29

13

Source: Adapted from Jha, Nugent, and others 2013.

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

187

Table 10.5 Range of Cost-Effectiveness Values for Price Increases, Nicotine Replacement Therapies, and
Nonprice Interventions, by World Bank Regions, 2000
(2002 US$/DALY saved)
33% price increase

NRTs with effectiveness
of 1–5%

Nonprice interventions with
effectiveness of 2–10%

World Bank region

Low and high estimate

Low and high estimate

Low and high estimate

East Asia and Pacific

2–30

65–864

40–498

Europe and Central Asia

3–42

45–633

55–685

Latin America and the Caribbean

6–85

53–812

109–1,361

Middle East and North Africa

6–89

47–750

115–1,432

South Asia

2–27

54–716

34–431

Sub-Saharan Africa

2–26

42–570

33–417

World

13–195

75–1,250

233–2,916

Source: Adapted from Jha, Chaloupka, and others 2006.
Note: Country economies are categorized according to 2002 World Bank regions. DALY = disability-adjusted life year; NRT = nicotine replacement therapy.

in longevity-related spending. Another study demonstrated that tobacco tax increases are cost-effective from
the health care perspective, even factoring in the medical
costs from years of life gained (van Baal and others 2007).

Poverty Considerations
Smoking in most countries is more common in lowerincome and lower-education groups (Palipudi and others
2012), and smoking causes greater disease burdens in the
poor than in the rich. In several HICs and Poland, smoking deaths account for at least one-half of the differences
in the middle-age risk of death between men who are
richer and more educated versus men who are poorer
and less educated (Jha, Peto, and others 2006).
A recent report from the Asian Development Bank
highlights the equity implications of tobacco taxation for
five high-burden countries: China, India, the Philippines,
Thailand, and Vietnam (ADB 2012). This study found
that a 50 percent increase in price (resulting from excise
tax increases of 75 percent to 122 percent) would decrease
the number of current and future smokers by almost
67 million, save 27 million people from tobacco-related
deaths, and generate in excess of US$24 billion in additional revenue annually (an increase of 143–178 percent
above existing cigarette tax revenue). Importantly, each
country’s poorest socioeconomic groups would undertake a relatively small proportion of the extra tax burden
but would gain a substantial proportion of the health
benefits from smoking reduction.
The ratio of health benefits obtained by the poor to
the additional taxes paid by the poor ranges from 1.4 to
9.5. Poorer income groups spend more of their income

188

Cancer

on tobacco than do richer groups, but the higher price
responsiveness by the poor in China showed that after a
50 percent price increase, those in the lowest two quintiles of income would gain 5 and 1 percent in net income,
whereas only the higher income quintiles would lose
income after the tax increase on tobacco (Verguet and
others 2015). Main and others (2008) conclude that
tax and price policies reduce inequalities, but they find
that cessation policies might increase inequities, given
the greater likelihood of quitting among higher social
groups. In LMICs with low levels of awareness of smoking risks and higher illiteracy levels, pictorial warning
labels might help to reduce inequalities.

IMPLEMENTATION OF TOBACCO CONTROL
INTERVENTIONS
Case Study: Tobacco Control in Uruguay
In Uruguay, smoking is a major cause of avoidable mortality; in 2004, smoking contributed to 14 percent of the
country’s total deaths (Sandoya and Bianco 2011).
Uruguay ratified the Framework Convention
on Tobacco Control (FCTC) in 2004; by 2005, the
country began to implement increasingly comprehensive tobacco control measures. Starting with banning
tobacco advertising except at the point of sale and
tobacco sponsorships, Uruguay outlawed smoking in
enclosed public spaces and workplaces. It also required
primary health care providers to give free diagnosis and
treatment of tobacco dependence, and stipulated that
pictograms with health warnings must cover 80 percent
of the front and back of cigarette packages. Terms like
light, mild, and low in tar were banned. Following a

sequence of tax increases, the real consumer price of a
pack of cigarettes rose by 88 percent from January 2003
to December 2010.
Abascal and others (2012) evaluated the impact of
these tobacco control measures by comparing Uruguay
with neighboring Argentina. Per-person consumption
of cigarettes fell by 4.3 percent annually in Uruguay but
increased by 0.6 percent in Argentina; the prevalence of
tobacco use in adolescents decreased by 8 percent annually in Uruguay and decreased 2.5 percent in Argentina;
and the prevalence of tobacco use by adults decreased
by 3.3 percent annually in Uruguay and decreased by
1.7 percent in Argentina.
The impact of specific interventions is difficult to
estimate, but studies suggest that comprehensive tobacco
control policies should be adopted. Reductions in
tobacco use of the size seen in Uruguay (approximately
23 percent over six years) would have a significant
impact on the future global burden of tobacco-associated
diseases.
Globalization and Tobacco Control
A new major challenge to tobacco control is the globalization of the tobacco industry. Globalization increasingly challenges strong domestic tobacco control policies
under various trade and investment agreements (in
addition to challenges in national courts). For example,
the major multinational tobacco companies have sued
the government of Uruguay for its aggressive tobacco
control policies. Australia’s plain packaging legislation
is being challenged by Philip Morris Asia under the
bilateral investment treaty between Hong Kong SAR,
China, where the corporation is based, and Australia,
as well as by the Dominican Republic, Honduras, and
Ukraine through the World Trade Organization (WTO)
(Oliver 2015). Similarly, Philip Morris International is
challenging Uruguay’s graphic warning labels and limit
on brand variations under a bilateral investment treaty
between Switzerland and Uruguay, while Indonesia won
its WTO case against the United States’ ban on cloveflavored cigarettes.
International Initiatives
The main vehicle to accelerate tobacco control is
WHO’s FCTC, the first global treaty on public health,
which has been signed by 180 countries. The FCTC has
specific provisions for the introduction of the strategies
with proven effectiveness discussed in this chapter. The
main limitation of the FCTC is that it is largely a statement of intent; the specific actions needed to implement the provisions in each country require ongoing

technical support. The highest priority is countering
the active influence of the tobacco industry, which
seeks to secure complex tax regimes favoring certain
segments of the tobacco market, as well as to lobby for
initiatives to confuse governments on tobacco taxes
(Jha and Alleyne 2015).
The 2013 World Health Assembly called on
governments to decrease the prevalence of smoking
by one-third by 2025 (WHO 2011); doing so would
avoid more than 200 million deaths from tobacco
over the remainder of the century (Jha 2009; Jha and
Peto 2014). However, few governments are investing
resources in tobacco control measures. HICs spent
the largest amount (US$1.4 per capita in 2010), which
was less than 1 percent of the revenues from tobacco
taxes. Middle-income countries spent a great deal less
(a little more than US$0.1 per capita in 2010); lowincome countries spent about US$0.1 per capita in 2010
(WHO 2013b).
Bloomberg Philanthropies and the Bill & Melinda
Gates Foundation have pledged, collectively, nearly
US$700 million to fund global tobacco control programs. Effective use of these funds could avoid a substantial number of deaths in the coming decades as a
result of increased adult cessation, and even more deaths
could be avoided in the second half of the 21st century
from lower increases in youth smoking rates.

CONCLUSIONS: AVOIDABLE TOBACCO
DEATHS BEFORE 2050
Earlier estimates (Jha 2009; Jha, Chaloupka, and others, 2006) have examined the potential impact of a
70 percent price increase and a 10 percent reduction
in tobacco consumption from nonprice interventions,
such as bans on public smoking and information measures, among the global cohort of 1.1 billion smokers in
2000. Price increases have the greatest impact on future
tobacco mortality; a 70 percent higher price would
prevent more than 110 million deaths, or one-fourth of
all expected premature deaths from tobacco worldwide.
Of the avoided deaths, about 25 million would be from
cancer and 50 million would be from vascular disease.
Nonprice interventions would prevent 35 million deaths.
Worldwide, a one-third reduction in smoking could
be achieved by doubling the inflation-adjusted price of
cigarettes; in many LMICs, this price increase could be
realized by tripling the real excise tax on tobacco. Other
nonprice interventions could help to reduce consumption and make the substantial increases in real excise
taxes politically acceptable. The main challenge remains
to try to bring forward the time when large numbers of
current smokers quit.

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

189

NOTES
World Bank Income Classifications as of July 2014 are as follows, based on estimates of gross national income (GNI) per
capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries (LICs) = US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries (MICs) are subdivided:
• lower-middle-income = US$1,046 to US$4,125
• upper-middle-income (UMICs) = US$4,126 to
US$12,745
High-income countries (HICs) = US$12,746 or more.

Acknowledgments: This chapter is dedicated to the late Sir
Richard Doll, who would have turned 100 years of age on
October 28, 2012. We thank Yul Dorothea, Cindy Gauvreau,
Hellen Gelband, Emmanuel Guindon, Paul Isenman, Tricia
Moser, and Ken Warner for comments; Joy Pader and Leslie
Newcombe for their editorial assistance; and Catherine Hill
for the French data and Corne van Walbeek for the South
African data. Sources of support: Disease Control Priorities 3,
the U.S. National Institutes of Health, the Canadian Institutes
of Health Research, and the Canada Research Chairs Program.

REFERENCES
Abascal, W., E. Esteves, B. Goja, F. G. Mora, A. Lorenzo, and
others. 2012. “Tobacco Control Campaign in Uruguay:
A Population-Based Trend Analysis.” The Lancet 380:
1575–82.
ADB (Asian Development Bank). 2012. Tobacco Taxes: A Win–
Win Measure for Fiscal Space and Health. Manila: ADB.
Alam, D. S., P. Jha, C. Ramasundarahettige, P. K. Streatfield,
L. W. Niessen, and others. 2013. “Smoking-Attributable
Mortality in Bangladesh: Proportional Mortality Study.”
Bulletin of the World Health Organization 91 (10): 757–64.
Asaria, P., D. Chishom, C. Mathers, M. Ezzati, and R. Beaglehole.
2007. “Chronic Disease Prevention: Health Effects and
Financial Costs of Strategies to Reduce Salt Intake and
Control Tobacco Use.” The Lancet 370: 2044–53.
Australian Bureau of Statistics. 2013. Australian Health Survey
(AHS) 2011–13: Tobacco Smoking. Australian Bureau of
Statistics. http://www.abs.gov.au/australianhealthsurvey.
Bala, M. M., L. Strzeszynski, R. Topor-Madry, and K. Cahill.
2013. “Mass Media Interventions for Smoking Cessation
in Adults.” Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews 6:
Cd004704. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD004704.pub3.
Barber, S., S. M. Adioetomo, A. Ahsan, and D. Setyonaluri.
2008. Tobacco Economics in Indonesia. Paris: International
Union Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.
Baumgardner, J., L. T. Bilheimer, M. B. Booth, W. J. Carrington,
N. J. Duchovny, and others. 2012. “Cigarette Taxes and the
Federal Budget—Report from the CBO.” New England
Journal of Medicine 367: 2068–70.
Becker, G. S., M. Grossman, and K. M. Murphy. 1994. “An
Empirical Analysis of Cigarette Addiction.” American
Economic Review 84 (3): 396–418.

190

Cancer

Blecher, E. 2008. “The Impact of Tobacco Advertising Bans on
Consumption in Developing Countries.” Journal of Health
Economics 27 (4): 930–42.
Blecher, E. H., and C. P. van Walbeek. 2009. “Cigarette
Affordability Trends: An Update and Some Methodological
Comments.” Tobacco Control 18 (3): 167–75. doi:10.1136
/tc.2008.026682.
Bullen, C., C. Howe, M. Laugesen, H. McRobbie, V. Parag,
and others. 2013. “Electronic Cigarettes for Smoking
Cessation: A Randomised Controlled Trial.” The Lancet 382
(9905): 1629–37. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(13)61842-5.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2009–11. National
Health Interview Survey (NHIS) 2009–11. U.S. Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention. http://www.cdc.gov/nchs
/nhis.htm.
Chaloupka, F. J. 1991. “Rational Addictive Behaviour and
Cigarette Smoking.” Journal of Political Economy 99 (4):
722–42.
Chaloupka, F. J., R. Peck, J. A. Tauras, X. Xu, and A. Yurekli.
2010. Cigarette Excise Taxation: The Impact of Tax Structure
on Prices, Revenues and Cigarette Smoking. NBER Working
Paper 16287, National Bureau of Economic Research,
Cambridge, MA. http://www.nber.org/papers/w16287.
Chaloupka, F. J., A. Yurekli, and G. T. Fong. 2012. “Tobacco
Taxes as a Tobacco Control Strategy.” Tobacco Control
21 (2): 172–80. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2011-050417.
Chen, Z., R. Peto, M. Smith, and others, for the China Kadoorie
Biobank Collaborative Group. Forthcoming. “Chinese
Mortality from Tobacco in the 21st century: Nationwide
Prospective Study of 0.5 Million Adults.” The Lancet.
Dikshit, R., P. C. Gupta, C. Ramasundarahettige, V. Gajalakshmi,
L. Aleksandrowicz, and others. 2012. “Cancer Mortality in
India: A Nationally Representative Survey.” The Lancet 379
(9828): 1807–16. doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(12)60358-4.
Doll, R., R. Peto, J. Boreham, and I. Sutherland. 2004. “Mortality
in Relation to Smoking: 50 Years’ Observations on Male
British Doctors.” British Medical Journal 328 (7455): 1519.
doi:10.1136/bmj.38142.554479.AE.
Euromonitor International. 2013. Cigarettes: Global.
Euromonitor International 2012. http://www.euromonitor
.com/tobacco.
Federal Trade Commission. 2015. Federal Trade Commission
Cigarette Report for 2012. https://www.ftc.gov/system/files
/documents/reports/federal-trade-commission-cigarette
-report-2012/150327-2012cigaretterpt.pdf.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser,
and others. 2013. “GLOBOCAN 2012 v1.0.” In Cancer
Incidence and Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase
No. 11 [Internet]. Lyon, France: International Agency for
Research on Cancer.
Forey, B. A., J. Hamling, J. Hamling, A. Thorton, and P. N. Lee.
2013. International Smoking Statistics (ISS): Web Edition.
http://www.pnlee.co.uk/ISS.htm.
Gajalakshmi, V., R. Peto, T. S. Kanaka, and P. Jha. 2003. “Smoking
and Mortality from Tuberculosis and Other Diseases in
India: Retrospective Study of 43,000 Adult Male Deaths and
35,000 Controls.” The Lancet 362 (9383): 507–15. doi:S0140
-6736(03)14109-8 [pii] 10.1016/S0140-6736(03)14109-8.

Gelband, H., P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, C. L. Gauvreau, and
S. Horton. 2015. “The Costs, Affordability and Feasibility
of an Essential Package of Cancer Control Interventions in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” In Disease Control
Priorities (third edition): Volume 3, Cancer, edited by
H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Giovino, G. A, S. A. Mirza, J. M. Samet, P. C. Gupta, M. J. Jarvis,
and others. 2012. “Tobacco Use in 3 Billion Individuals from
16 Countries: An Analysis of Nationally Representative
Cross-Sectional Household Surveys.” The Lancet 380:
668–79.
Gruber, J., and B. Köszegi. 2001. “Is Addiction ‘Rational’?
Theory and Evidence.” The Quarterly Journal of Economics
116 (4): 1261–303. doi:10.1162/003355301753265570.
Gu, D., T. N. Kelly, X. Wu, J. Chen, J. M. Samet, and others.
2009. “Mortality Attributable to Smoking in China.” New
England Journal of Medicine 360 (2): 150–59. doi:360/2/150
[pii] 10.1056/NEJMsa0802902.
Hammond, D. 2010. “‘Plain Packaging’ Regulations for Tobacco
Products: The Impact, the Standardizing, the Color, and
Design of Cigarette Packs.” Salud Publica de Mexico 52
(Suppl.): 226–32.
Hartmann-Boyce, J., L. F. Stead, K. Cahill, and T. Lancaster.
2014. “Efficacy of Interventions to Combat Tobacco
Addiction: Cochrane Update of 2013 Reviews.” Addiction
109 (9): 1414–25. doi:10.1111/add.12633.
Health Canada. 2012. Canadian Tobacco Use Monitoring Survey
(CTUMS). http://www.hc-sc.gc.ca/hc-ps/tobac-tabac
/research-recherche/stat/index-eng.php.
Hu, T-W., Z. Mao, J. Shi, and W. Chen. 2008. Tobacco Taxation
and Its Potential Impact in China. Paris: International Union
Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.
Huang J., J. Tauras, and F. J. Chaloupka. 2014. “The Impact
of Price and Tobacco Control Policies on the Demand
for Electronic Nicotine Delivery Systems.” 2014.
Tobacco Control 23 (suppl 3): iii41–47. doi:10.1136/
tobaccocontrol-2013-051515.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2004.
IARC Monographs on the Evaluation of the Carcinogenic
Risks of Chemicals to Humans. Volume 83, Tobacco Smoke
and Involuntary Smoking. Lyon, France: IARC, WHO Press.
———. 2009. Tobacco Control: Evaluating the Effectiveness
of Smoke-Free Policies. IARC Handbooks of Cancer
Prevention. Lyon, France: IARC.
———. 2011. Effectiveness of Tax and Price Policies for Tobacco
Control. Edited by International Agency for Research
on Cancer. Volume 14, IARC Handbooks of Cancer
Prevention. Lyon, France: IARC, WHO Press.
International Tobacco Control Policy Evaluation Project. 2009.
FCTC Article 11 Tobacco Warning Labels: Evidence and
Recommendations from the ITC Project. Waterloo, ON:
International Tobacco Control Policy Evaluation Project.
Jacobs, R., H. F. Gale, T. C. Capehart, P. Zhang, and P. Jha. 2000.
“The Supply-Side Effects of Tobacco Control Policies.”
In Tobacco Control in Developing Countries, edited by
P. Jha and F. J. Chaloupka, 311–341. Oxford, UK: Oxford
University Press.

Jha, P. 2009. “Avoidable Global Cancer Deaths and Total Deaths
from Smoking.” Nature Reviews Cancer 9: 655–64.
———. 2013. “The 21st Century Benefits of Smoking
Cessation in Europe.” European Journal of Epidemiology
28 (8): 617–19. doi:10.1007/s10654-013-9835-6.
Jha, P., and G. Alleyne. 2015. “Effective Global Tobacco Control
in the Next Decade.” Canadian Medical Association Journal.
doi:10.1503/cmaj.150261.
Jha, P., and F. J. Chaloupka. 1999. Curbing the Epidemic:
Governments and the Economics of Tobacco Control.
Washington, DC: World Bank.
Jha, P., F. J. Chaloupka, J. Moore, V. Gajalakshmi, P. C. Gupta,
and others. 2006. “Tobacco Addiction.” In Disease Control
Priorities in Developing Countries, 2nd ed., edited by
D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne,
M. Claeson, D. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove,
869–86. Washington, DC: World Bank and Oxford
University Press.
Jha, P., E. Guindon, R. A. Joseph, A. Nandi, R. M. John, and
others. 2011. “A Rational Taxation System of Bidis and
Cigarettes to Reduce Smoking Deaths in India.” Economic
and Political Weekly 46 (4.2): 44–51.
Jha, P., B. Jacob, V. Gajalakshmi, P. C. Gupta, N. Dhingra, and
others. 2008. “A Nationally Representative Case-Control
Study of Smoking and Death in India.” New England
Journal of Medicine 358 (11): 1137–47. doi:NEJMsa0707719
[pii] 10.1056/NEJMsa0707719.
Jha, P., P. Mony, J. A. Moore, and W. Zatoński. 2009. “Avoidance
of World-Wide Vascular Deaths and Total Deaths from
Smoking.” In Evidence-Based Cardiology, 3rd ed., edited by
S. Yusuf, J. Cairns, A. J. Camm, E. L. Fallen, and B. J. Gersh.
Oxford, UK: Wiley-Blackwell.
Jha, P., R. Nugent, S. Verguet, D. E. Bloom, and R. J. Hum.
2013. “Chronic Disease Control and Prevention.” In
Global Problems, Smart Solutions—Costs and Benefits,
edited by B. Lomborg. Cambridge, UK: Cambridge
University Press.
Jha, P., and R. Peto. 2014. “Global Effects of Smoking, of
Quitting, and of Taxing Tobacco.” The New England Journal
of Medicine 370 (1): 60–68. doi:10.1056/NEJMra1308383.
———. 2014. “Tax Hike on Tobacco Could Save 25,000 Lives.”
The Star [Toronto], February 25. http://www.thestar.com
/opinion/commentary/2014/02/25/tax_hike_on_tobacco
_could_save_25000_lives.html.
———. 2015. “Deaths and Taxes: Stronger Global Tobacco
Control by 2025.” The Lancet 385 (9972): 18–20.
Jha, P., R. Peto, W. Zatoński, J. Boreham, M. J. Jarvis, and
A. D. Lopez. 2006. “Social Inequalities in Male Mortality
and in Male Mortality from Smoking: Indirect Estimation
from National Death Rates in England and Wales, Poland,
and North America.” The Lancet 368 (9533): 367–70.
Jha, P., C. Ramasundarahettige, V. Landsman, B. Rostron,
M. Thun, and others. 2013. “21st-Century Hazards of
Smoking and Benefits of Cessation in the United States.”
The New England Journal of Medicine 368 (4): 341–50.
doi:10.1056/NEJMsa1211128.
Joossens, L., D. Merriman, H. Ross, and M. Raw. 2009. How
Eliminating the Global Illicit Cigarette Trade Would Increase

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

191

Tax Revenue and Save Lives. Paris: International Union
Against Tuberculosis and Lung Disease.
Joossens, L., and M. Raw. 2008. “Progress in Combating
Cigarette Smuggling: Controlling the Supply Chain.”
Tobacco Control 17 (6): 399–404. doi:tc.2008.026567 [pii]
10.1136/tc.2008.026567.
Kenkel, D., and L. Chen. 2000. “Consumer Information and
Tobacco Use.” In Tobacco Control in Developing Countries,
edited by P. Jha and F. J. Chaloupka, 177–214. Oxford, UK:
Oxford University Press.
Kostova, D., H. Ross, E. Blecher, and S. Markowitz. 2011.
“Is Youth Smoking Responsive to Cigarette Prices? Evidence
from Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Tobacco Control
20: 419–24.
Lam, T. H., Y. He, L. S. Li, S. F. He, and B. Q. Liang. 1997.
“Mortality Attributable to Cigarette Smoking in China.”
Journal of the American Medical Association 278: 1505–08.
Main, C., S. Thomas, D. Ogilvie, L. Stirk, M. Petticrew, and
others. 2008. “Population Tobacco Control Interventions
and Their Effects on Social Inequalities in Smoking: Placing
an Equity Lens on Existing Systematic Reviews.” BMC
Public Health 8: 178. doi:10.1186/1471-2458-8-178.
Mons, U., G. E. Nagelhout, S. Allwright, R. Guignard, B. van
den Putte, M. Willemsen, and others. 2011. “Adoption
of Home Smoking Bans after the Implementation of
National Smoke-Free Laws: Results from the ITC Europe
Surveys.” Paper presented at the meeting of the European
Conference on Tobacco or Health, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands, March.
National Institute of Drug Abuse. 2015. Monitoring the
Future 2014 Survey Results. http://www.drugabuse.gov
/related-topics/trends-statistics/infographics/monitoring
-future-2014-survey-results.
Ng, M., M. K. Freeman, T. D. Fleming, M. Robinson,
L. Dwyer-Lindgren, and others. 2014. “Smoking Prevalence
and Cigarette Consumption in 187 Countries, 1980–2012.”
JAMA 311 (2): 183–92. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.284692.
Nikaj, S., and F. J. Chaloupka. 2014. “The Effect of Prices on
Cigarette Use among Youths in the Global Youth Tobacco
Survey.” Nicotine & Tobacco Research 16 (Suppl. 1): S16–23.
doi:10.1093/ntr/ntt019.
Norheim, O. F., P. Jha, K. Admasu, T. Godal, R. J. Hum, and
others. 2014. “Avoiding 40% of the Premature Deaths in
Each Country, 2010–30: Review of National Mortality
Trends to Help Quantify the UN Sustainable Development
Goal for Health.” The Lancet 385 (9964): 239–52.
Oliver J. 2015. Last Week Tonight with John Oliver: Tobacco.
https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6UsHHOCH4q8.
Palipudi, K. M., P. C. Gupta, D. N. Sinha, L. J. Andes,
S. Asma, and others. 2012. “Social Determinants of
Health and Tobacco Use in Thirteen Low and Middle
Income Countries: Evidence from Global Adult Tobacco
Survey.” PLoS One 7 (3): e33466. doi:10.1371/journal
.pone.0033466.
Peto, R., and A. D. Lopez. 2001. “The Future Worldwide Health
Effects of Current Smoking Patterns.” In Critical Issues in
Global Health, edited by E. C. Koop, C. E. Pearson, and
M. R. Schwarz. New York: Jossey-Bass.

192

Cancer

Peto, R., A. D. Lopez, J. Boreham, and M. Thun. 2012.
“Mortality from Smoking in Developed Countries, 1950–
2005 (or later): United Kingdom.” http://www.ctsu.ox.ac
.uk/~tobacco/C4308.pdf.
Peto, R., A. D. Lopez, J. Boreham, M. Thun, and C. Heath, Jr.
1992. “Mortality from Tobacco in Developed Countries:
Indirect Estimation from National Vital Statistics.” The Lancet
339 (8804): 1268–78. doi:0140-6736(92)91600-D [pii].
Pirie, K., R. Peto, G. K. Reeves, J. Green, and V. Beral. 2013.
“The 21st Century Hazards of Smoking and Benefits of
Stopping: A Prospective Study of One Million Women
in the UK.” The Lancet 381 (9861): 133–41. doi:10.1016
/s0140-6736(12)61720-6.
Reuter, P. 2013. “Can Tobacco Control Endgame Analysis
Learn Anything from the US Experience with Illegal
Drugs?” Tobacco Control 22 (Suppl. 1): i49–51. doi:10.1136
/tobaccocontrol-2012-050809.
Sakata, R., P. McGale, E. J. Grant, K. Ozasa, R. Peto, and
others. 2012. “Impact of Smoking on Mortality and Life
Expectancy in Japanese Smokers: A Prospective Cohort
Study.” British Medical Journal 345: e7093. doi:10.1136
/bmj.e7093.
Sandoya, E., and E. Bianco. 2011. “Mortality from Smoking
and Second-Hand Smoke in Uruguay.” Revista Uruguaya de
Cardiologia 26: 201–06.
Shang, C., F. J. Chaloupka, N. Zahra, and G. T. Fong. 2014.
“The Distribution of Cigarette Prices Under Different
Tax Structures: Findings from the International Tobacco
Control Policy Evaluation (ITC) Project.” Tobacco Control 23
(Suppl. 1): i23–29. doi:10.1136/tobaccocontrol-2013-050966.
Sitas, F., S. Egger, D. Bradshaw, P. Groenewald, R. Laubscher,
and others. 2013. “Differences among the Coloured, White,
Black, and Other South African Populations in SmokingAttributed Mortality at Ages 35–74 Years: A Case-Control
Study of 481,640 Deaths.” The Lancet 382 (9893): 685–93.
doi:10.1016/s0140-6736(13)61610-4.
Stead, L. F., D. Buitrago, N. Preciado, G. Sanchez,
J. Hartmann-Boyce, and others. 2013. “Physician Advice
for Smoking Cessation.” Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 5: Cd000165. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD000165
.pub4.
Tauras, J. A. 1999. “The Transition to Smoking Cessation:
Evidence from Multiple Failure Duration Analysis.” NBER
Working Paper 7412. National Bureau of Economic
Research, Cambridge MA.
Tauras, J. A., and F. J. Chaloupka. 2004. “Impact of Tobacco
Control Spending and Tobacco Control Policies on
Adolescents’ Attitudes and Beliefs about Cigarette Smoking.”
Evidence-Based Preventive Medicine 1 (2): 111–20.
Thun, M. J., B. D. Carter, D. Feskanich, N. D. Freedman,
R. Prentice, and others. 2013. “50-Year Trends in
Smoking-Related Mortality in the United States.” The New
England Journal of Medicine 368 (4): 351–64. doi:10.1056
/NEJMsa1211127.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services. 2014. The
Health Consequences of Smoking: 50 Years of Progress.
A Report of the Surgeon General. Atlanta, GA: Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention.

van Baal, P. H., W. B. Brouwer, R. T. Hoogenveen, and
T. L. Feenstra. 2007. “Increasing Tobacco Taxes: A Cheap
Tool to Increase Public Health.” Health Policy 82 (2): 142–52.
Van Walbeek, C. P. 2006. “Industry Responses to the Tobacco
Excise Tax Increases in South Africa.” South African Journal
of Economics 74: 110–22.
Verguet, S., C. L. Gauvreau, S. Mishra, M. MacLennan,
S. M. Murphy, and others. 2015. “The Consequences of
Raising Tobacco Tax on Household Health and Finances
among Richer and Poorer Smokers in China: An Extended
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.” The Lancet Global Health
3 (4): e206-e216. doi:10.1016/S2214-109X(15)70095-1.
Wakefield, M. A., L. Hayes, S. Durkin, and R. Borland. 2013.
“Introduction Effects of the Australian Plain Packaging
Policy on Adult Smokers: A Cross-Sectional Study.” BMJ
Open 3 (7): e003175. doi:10.1136/Bmjopen-2013-003175.
West, R., W. Zatoński, M. Cedzynska, D. Lewandowska, J. Pazik,
and others. 2011. “Placebo-Controlled Trial of Cytisine for
Smoking Cessation.” New England Journal of Medicine 365
(13): 1193–200.
Whittaker, R., H. Mcrobbie, C. Bullen, R. Borland, A. Rodgers,
and others. 2012. “Mobile Phone-Based Interventions
for Smoking Cessation.” Cochrane Database of Systematic
Reviews 11: Cd006611. doi:10.1002/14651858.CD006611
.Pub3.

WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. WHO Technical
Manual on Tobacco Tax Administration. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2011. Scaling Up Action Against Non-Communicable
Diseases: How Much Will It Cost? Geneva: WHO.
———. 2013a. Global Health Observatory 2013. http://www
.who.int/gho/mortality_burden_disease/en/.
———. 2013b. WHO Report on the Global Tobacco Epidemic.
Geneva: WHO.
WHO-GATS (World Health Organization–Global Adult
Tobacco Survey). Various years. Global Adult Tobacco
Survey. WHO. http://www.who.int/tobacco/surveillance
/gats/en/.
Yurekli, A., and O. Sayginsoy. 2010. “Worldwide Organized
Cigarette Smuggling: An Empirical Analysis.” Journal of
Applied Economics 42 (5): 545–61.
Zatoński, W. A., and M. Mańczuk. 2010. “Tobacco Smoking and
Tobacco-Related Harm in the European Union with Special
Attention to the New EU Member States.” In Tobacco:
Science, Policy, and Public Health, edited by P. Boyle,
N. Gray, J. Henningfield, J. Seffrin, and W. A. Zatoński.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Zatoński, W., K. Przewozniak, U. Sulkowska, R. West, and
A. Wojtyla. 2012. “Tobacco Smoking in Countries of the
European Union.” Annals of Agricultural and Environmental
Medicine 19 (2): 181–92.

Global Hazards of Tobacco and the Benefits of Smoking Cessation and Tobacco Taxes

193

Chapter

11

Cancer Services and the
Comprehensive Cancer Center
Mary Gospodarowicz, Joann Trypuc, Anil D‘Cruz,
Jamal Khader, Sherif Omar, and Felicia Knaul

INTRODUCTION
Most countries and numerous global and local organizations are addressing the challenges of cancer (Blanchet
and others 2013; Knaul, Alleyne, Atun, and others 2012),
including the development of comprehensive national
cancer control programs designed to reduce the number
of cancer cases and deaths and to improve the quality of
life of cancer patients through evidence-based strategies
for prevention, early detection, diagnosis, treatment,
and palliation. A national cancer control program
addresses the functions and delivery of many components of cancer control (http://www.who.int/cancer
/nccp/en/). The delivery of most services is anchored
in comprehensive cancer centers (Gralow and others
2012; Hensher, Price, and Adomakoh 2006; Sloan and
Gelband 2007).
This chapter describes an optimal framework for
a comprehensive cancer center, which can be a freestanding dedicated institution, a program within an
academic health science center or a community hospital,
or a group of hospitals providing an integrated program.
The first section presents an overview of the framework for a comprehensive cancer center, which includes
three levels that are embedded within a comprehensive
cancer system. Detailed information on each level is
presented, followed by a discussion of quality as an

integrating theme for the framework. The chapter concludes by detailing the benefits that a comprehensive
cancer center provides to a country’s cancer control and
health care efforts.
Cancer System Functions
Cancer system planning includes the development of
population-based cancer plans, at the national or lower
levels. Cancer plans address all aspects of cancer control, including cancer registries, practice and operating
standards, research, health care education and practice
standards, certification and accreditation of service providers, and system performance.
Cancer System Components
The World Health Organization (WHO) (2006b) recommends that all nations have a cancer control plan
that includes these components: prevention, screening,
diagnosis, treatment, survivorship, and palliative and
end-of-life care (figure 11.1).
Many cancer control components are provided
in comprehensive cancer centers, regardless of a
country’s resource level. WHO and others have recommended that every country aim to have at least
one publicly supported cancer center that advances

Corresponding author: Mary Gospodarowicz, MD FRCPC FRCR (Hon), Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, University of Toronto Mary.Gospodarowicz@rmp.uhn.on.ca

195

the broad objectives of control; provides exemplary
patient care, appropriate to local circumstances and
resources; and concentrates the specialized human
and technical resources of the country (Gralow and
others 2012; Knaul, Gralow, and others 2012; Sloan
and Gelband 2007).
Comprehensive Cancer Centers in LMICs
Many low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) are
developing comprehensive cancer centers with public
or private resources. Patients can be managed directly
at the centers; for many aspects of treatment, they can
be managed in less specialized hospitals and local health
clinics, with the center providing oversight and care
plans. Comprehensive cancer centers educate health care
professionals and the public, and they conduct research
on the causes, prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of
cancer (National Cancer Institute 2012).
Comprehensive cancer centers can act as focal points
for cancer control nationally (Sloan and Gelband 2007)
and influence cancer and health system development.

By strengthening health system capacity, cancer centers
go beyond treating cancer as a vertical, disease-specific
program, to enable a diagonal approach that cuts across
horizontal initiatives that target system-wide constraints
to address the overall goals of the health system (Knaul,
Alleyne, Piot, and others 2012). The capacity to develop
comprehensive cancer systems varies with available
resources, national governance, management effectiveness, public accountability, engagement of civil society,
and other factors (Knaul, Alleyne, Atun, and others 2012;
WHO 2012).
Although this goal will take time to attain in
many countries, it is being successfully achieved in
multiple settings (Knaul, Gralow, and others 2012).
For example, the King Hussein Cancer Center in
Jordan, an upper-middle-income country, progressed
from offering limited access to poorly organized,
low-quality cancer services to providing internationally accredited cancer care, engaging in cancer-related
education and research, leading national control
planning efforts, and contributing to regional and
global efforts (box 11.1).

Figure 11.1 Cancer Control Components

Prevention

Screening

Diagnosis

Treatment

Survivorship

Palliative
/supportive
/end-of-life
care

Source: Adapted from Cancer Care Ontario 2013.

Box 11.1

King Hussein Cancer Foundation and Center, Jordan
The King Hussein Cancer Foundation in Amman,
Jordan, is an independent, nongovernmental,
non-profit organization that oversees the operations
of the cancer center. The hospital first opened in
1997 as the Al-Amal Center or Center of Hope and
was renamed the King Hussein Cancer Center in
September 2002. The center treats all types of cancer
in adults and children from the Middle East and
North Africa.

The center evolved by:
• Reversing the brain drain by convincing
accomplished clinical and executive leaders
working in high-income countries to return
to the region to create the foundation for and
expansion of excellent cancer care
• Designing and building a well-functioning and
appropriately equipped physical facility
box continues next page

196

Cancer

Box 11.1 (continued)
• Raising the standard of care in surgery, systemic/
chemotherapy, radiation therapy, nursing
oncology, bone marrow transplantation, and
psycho-oncology
• Adopting policies and procedures to ensure
effective, efficient, safe operations
• Establishing cancer education, training, and
public awareness programs, including oncology
fellowships and residency programs
• Developing a research program
• Collaborating with other centers to improve
cancer care, training, and research; these include
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, H. Lee
Moffitt Cancer Center, and MD Anderson
Cancer Center in the United States; the Hospital
for Sick Children and Princess Margaret Cancer
Centre in Canada; National Cancer Institute in
the Arab Republic of Egypt; American University
of Beirut, Lebanon; Augusta Victoria Hospital in
Israel; Stefan-Morsch Foundation in Germany;
and Leeds Cancer Centre in the United Kingdom.
In 2006, the King Hussein Cancer Center was
accredited as a hospital by Joint Commission
International (JCI); in 2007, the center was certified

FRAMEWORK FOR A COMPREHENSIVE
CANCER CENTER
The comprehensive cancer center has three layers: clinical management, clinical services, and core services
(figure 11.2).
The framework provides a reference point for planning for a comprehensive center, even if this is achieved
incrementally as funding and capacity are built up.
Clinical Management
Patient Care Plans
Clinical management sets standards for clinical decision
making and formulating patient care plans. Patient care
plans are based on the histopathologic and/or molecular
diagnosis identifying the type of cancer; the anatomic
disease extent or stage; and the individual patient’s characteristics, such as age, comorbidities, and performance
status. Determining the best clinical management for
cancer patients involves defining the goals of care—cure,

by JCI’s Clinical Care Program in cancer. The
center helped organize the Ministry of Health’s
national early detection and awareness program.
It is also leading an effort to establish a national
cancer control planning program. Internationally,
the European Arab Society of Oncology has recognized the center as a Cancer Center of Excellence
for the training of cancer health workers from the
region. The center has signed agreements with Petra
University to establish the first diploma program
in tobacco dependence treatment in the region,
as well as with the German Jordan University to
establish a diploma program in nursing oncology.
The center is a WHO collaborating center. The
center and foundation are active in the Union
for International Cancer Control (UICC) and are
helping other countries in the region to collaborate
with UICC.
The center continues to develop to meet increasing patient demand from Jordan and the region.
Construction is underway to double capacity
by mid-2016. Capacity building is ongoing with
recruitment of additional staff, including in cancer
subspecialties, as is strengthening of cancer research
and education activities.

disease control, symptom control—recommending
appropriate interventions, and setting out the optimal
timeframes for instituting and completing treatment.
The patient care plans vary from simple to complex, and
may require a range of services.
Errors in clinical decisions can lead to increased
morbidity and disability, increased costs, and even
premature death. For example, a recent study reported
that almost one-quarter of children with acute myeloid
leukemia in El Salvador, Guatemala, and Honduras
died from largely avertable treatment-related mortality
(Gupta and others 2012).
Clinical Practice Guidelines
Clinical practice guidelines are developed to assist practitioners and patients in deciding on appropriate care
for their circumstances (Hensher, Price, and Adomakoh
2006). Comprehensive cancer centers play a leadership
role in developing and promoting treatment guidelines
locally and nationally. Center clinicians and researchers work with professional organizations to develop

Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

197

ma Clin
na ica
ge l
me
nt

Cli

nic

al

se

rvi

Co

ce

s

re

se

rvi

ce

s

Co

mp

reh
e
co nsive
ntr
ol can
ce

r

Figure 11.2 Framework for a Comprehensive Cancer Center

guidelines for a wide range of scenarios. Some examples include the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force for
screening guidelines and Cancer Care Ontario’s Program
in Evidence-Based Care, which produces evidence-based
guidance documents.1 Guidelines are not limited to
therapeutic interventions and include indications for
medical imaging and other diagnostic interventions2
and for symptom management. Nursing and other
allied health professions develop guidelines to organize
and direct care.3 Guidelines must be adapted for use
in resource-constrained settings (Anderson and others
2008; Kerr and Midgley 2010).
Many clinical practice guidelines have been adopted
and adapted for use in LMICs (Gralow and others
2012; Konduri and others 2012). Although the focus
of most of these initiatives is broader than the comprehensive cancer centers, their impact has influenced the
care of patients within centers. A well-known international example is the Breast Health Global Initiative,
which has developed evidence-based, economically
feasible, and culturally appropriate guidelines for
breast health and cancer control in LMICs (chapter
3, this volume [Anderson and others 2015]; El Saghir
and others 2011; Varughese and Richman 2010). The
matrix guideline spans the spectrum of breast health
care, from early detection to treatment and palliation,
and considers the available resources at each stage
(Sloan and Gelband 2007). Another example is the

198

Cancer

Comprehensive
cancer center

United States–based National Comprehensive Cancer
Network, which collaborates to produce international
adaptations and translations of its guidelines that may
include modifications based on local circumstances.4
Other examples include efforts in India to establish
a wide range of guidelines adapted to local resource
availability,5 and consensus group recommendations
for imaging techniques for head and neck cancers in
Singapore and South Asia, as developed by Wee and
colleagues depending on resource availability (Wee and
others 2009). Mexico has developed a series of Normas
Officiales Mexicanas (Official Mexican Standards) that
guide cancer services and finance.
Clinical Services
Clinical service departments include facilities, equipment, skilled personnel, and policies and procedures
to deliver diagnostic, treatment, or supportive care.
The cancer center works to integrate these services
effectively. For example, there is no point in offering
screening if positive results cannot be followed up with
definitive diagnostic tests and, if needed, treatment.
Access to the full range of clinical services is critical
for timely and appropriate cancer diagnosis and treatment. A timely and accurate diagnosis is critical, because
early detection makes the difference between a curable
cancer and an untreatable one.

Many clinical service departments require special
accreditation and are subject to external review and
control, such as in radiation protection and safety
for imaging and radiotherapy, external accreditation
for laboratory services, and cell therapy. Accreditation
standards may be regional or national, or they may be
international (Econex 2010).6
Office- and Clinic-Based Ambulatory Care
The initial patient encounter with a cancer system often
happens in an office or clinic, where cancer-related
ambulatory procedures, such as clinical visits, physical
examinations, Pap smears, blood samples, or endoscopies, can take place. Guidelines help to determine when
and where these procedures should occur and how
they should be provided properly and safely by trained
staff. Ambulatory facilities may need special equipment
to address the needs of various patient populations,
for example, special examining tables for gynecologic
malignancies, and chairs and special endoscopic equipment for assessing head and neck cancers. Depending
on the activity and jurisdiction, special facilities to support these procedures may be required and should be
accredited.
Medical Imaging (Diagnostic Radiology)
Imaging is a critical technology for diagnosis, to assess
the effects of cancer treatment and complications, monitor for the recurrence of cancer, and screen the general
population for cancerous conditions. It also is used to
guide interventional procedures such as biopsies under
ultrasound, computed tomography (CT), or magnetic
resonance imaging (MRI); securing of vascular access;
and therapeutic interventions, such as embolization and
high frequency ultrasound tumor ablation. Imaging for
cancer ranges from conventional X-rays to ultrasound,
CT, MRI, and molecular imaging (nuclear medicine)
with position emission tomography, frequently combined with CT.
Imaging services require equipment and specialized
staff, such as radiologists and radiology technologists,
to operate and maintain the equipment. International
organizations, such as the International Atomic Energy
Agency, the International Society of Radiology, and
WHO, have developed and published standards and
guidelines for the safe installation, operation, and use
of imaging equipment. This information is used to
create national and regional standards (for example,
Radiation Safety Institute of Canada 2014; Zaidi 2010).
Picture archiving and communication systems and webbased systems allow for offsite evaluation and reporting
of images and are useful in management of care in
remote communities, remote mentoring, and quality

control initiatives. These processes are especially useful
in limited-resource settings.
Pathology and Laboratory Medicine
Pathology and laboratory medicine, including blood
banking, are essential for diagnosing cancer by examining patient biologic specimens. Laboratory medicine
services include pathology, hematology, biochemistry,
microbiology, and, increasingly, cytogenetic and molecular testing, services that are not specific to cancer.
Pathology and laboratory medicine services require
facilities equipped to handle biological specimens with
appropriate precautions, and specialized equipment to
process and analyze tissues, blood, serum, and body
fluids. Basic pathology can include the capability for
specimen fixation, embedding into paraffin, tissue slicing,
and staining; modern facilities must include immunohistochemistry, flow cytometry, and molecular and cytogenetic testing (Gralow and others 2012). Given that the
diagnosis of cancer, especially rare cancers, is complex,
subspecialty expertise or access to such expertise via
international networks is required. Collaborative or twinning initiatives have been developed to support pathology
services in LMICs. Examples include a Ghana-Norway
partnership as part of the Breast Health Global Initiative
(Masood and others 2008) and Partners in Health,
which includes clinics in a number of LMICs (Haiti and
Rwanda) with close ties to the Brigham and Women’s
Hospital and Dana-Farber Cancer Institute (Carlson and
others 2010). Laboratories require specialized accreditation to ensure that processes are in place to optimize the
quality of specimen procurement and reporting.7
Surgery
Surgery is a fundamental element of cancer treatment
and its pertinence to LMICs is the subject of chapter 13
of this volume (Dare and others 2015). Well-established
interventions have proven effective in reducing surgical
risk and provide promising strategies to improve outcomes (Weiser and Gawande 2015). The introduction
of standardized practices, such as the Surgical Safety
Checklist endorsed by WHO, has improved the outcomes of surgical procedures in countries at all economic
levels (Farmer and others 2010; Gawande 2009; Haynes
and others 2009; Lingard and others 2008; Lingard and
others 2011; World Alliance for Patient Safety 2008). The
use of comprehensive standard policies and procedures
facilitates safe and efficient operations.
Radiation Therapy
Radiation therapy, or radiotherapy, involves the use
of ionizing radiation for therapeutic purposes. It is
the subject of chapter 14 in this volume. Strategies to

Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

199

improve access to radiotherapy in LMICs have been
suggested, including offering basic treatment techniques
and optimizing fractionation to increase the throughput
on radiotherapy machines, encouraging competitive
pricing, and supporting long-distance mentorship for
programs in remote areas (Gralow and others 2012).
For many reasons, cobalt machines have frequently
been considered more appropriate for LMICs (IAEA
2008, 2010). These views are changing as access to more
sophisticated technologies is improving. Although linear
accelerators require a more reliable power supply, cobalt
units present a higher radiation safety risk and require
frequent source replacement, which presents a hazard
and additional expense.
Systemic Cancer Therapy or Chemotherapy
In systemic cancer therapy or chemotherapy, drugs
are distributed in the body through the bloodstream.
These drugs include chemotherapy, administered
intravenously or orally; hormones; and immune and
molecular-targeted therapies. Systemic therapy is used
alone or in combination with surgery and radiotherapy to reduce recurrence, improve survival (Gralow
and others 2012; Valentini, Barba, and Gambacorta
2010), and help preserve organs. Chemotherapy alone
is used in hematologic cancers and in most metastatic
cancers. Chemotherapy facilities can be used for other
intravenous treatments, transfusions, minor procedures such as bone marrow biopsies, thoracentesis,
paracentesis, and lumbar puncture for cancer and
noncancerous conditions. Systemic therapy can usually
be delivered in specialized ambulatory facilities in hospital outpatient units and community-based medical
offices or clinics.8
Chemotherapy drugs may be expensive, although a
host of agents are now off patent and can be effective and
used extensively in LMICs (Konduri and others 2012).
Several of the cancers endemic to the lowest income settings are amenable to treatment with relatively low-cost
chemotherapy, but treatment cost is still a major barrier
for many in LMICs.
Palliative Care and Supportive Care
Palliative care aims to prevent or relieve suffering, provide early identification and assessment of symptoms,
and address other physical, psychosocial, and spiritual
issues (WHO 2006a). It is the subject of chapter 9 of this
volume (Cleary, Gelband, and Wagner 2015).
Survivorship
Survivorship is defined as the care of persons diagnosed
with cancer, from the time of diagnosis throughout their
lives, as well as the impact of cancer on family members,

200

Cancer

friends, and caregivers of survivors (Centers for Disease
Control and Prevention 2013).
Increasingly, as treatments become more successful
and life expectancy increases, patients face new issues.
With improvements in access to and quality of care, this
will increasingly be the case in LMICs, where survivorship services are currently unavailable.
Psychosocial support can be provided to patients
and their families by a broad range of people, depending on the level of need. Complex mental health issues
and social matters can benefit from the engagement
of other health professionals, including primary care
providers, community health workers, spiritual guides,
volunteers, friends, families, and other lay individuals.
Comprehensive cancer centers should have a survivorship program with a range of professionals, including
psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers, nurses, therapists, nutritionists, and educators, as well as patients in
treatment and long-term survivors.
Core Services
Core services are delivered by departments of administration and management, human resources, information technology and management, physical facilities,
pharmacy, infection prevention and control, quality assurance, and finance. The level of core services
depends on the size of the center and whether it is a
designated standalone facility, part of a larger hospital,
or a consortium of providers. In the latter two instances,
the core services may not be specific to cancer and
may be used for the management of other diseases and
injuries. Generally, the core services must meet accreditation and licensing standards and guidelines and
are usually included in the hospital accreditation. The
lack of investment in core services leads to poor access
to and performance of clinical services (Grimes and
others 2011), including poor quality, inefficient use of
resources, and negative impacts on health (Mavalankar
and others 2005).
External challenges to core service infrastructure
can paralyze the best clinical service. For example,
long-term increases in the price of petroleum needed
for medical supplies; transportation of goods, personnel, and patients; and fuel for lighting, heating,
cooling, and medical equipment may have significant
adverse impacts on health sectors in LMICs (Dalglish,
Poulsen, and Winch 2013). In addition, the absence
of robust supply chain management may result in
delays in pathology reporting because of the lack of
reagents, and insufficient maintenance may result in
equipment breakdowns that limit access to imaging or
radiotherapy.

Administration and Management
Cancer care is complex and requires skilled and accountable leadership and management at all levels. Generally,
hospitals with better management have better clinical
outcomes, and good management practices help to
preserve or enhance the quality of care (Carter, Dorgan,
and Layton 2011). Useful frameworks exist to help guide
the development and ongoing excellence of administration and management. For example, the United
States–based Baldrige Performance Excellence Program
focuses on performance excellence in leadership, strategic planning, customer focus, workforce focus, operations focus, results and measurement, and analysis
and knowledge management (Baldrige Performance
Excellence Program, National Institute of Standards and
Technology, and U.S. Department of Commerce 2011);
the program has a self-assessment tool.
Human Resources
Cancer centers require appropriately trained and licensed
clinicians and administrative and support staff. Centers
need to recruit and retain staff and provide professional
and career development opportunities to maintain competence and develop new skills. Core human resource
services include identifying the roles and responsibilities
of the range of positions within the center, setting compensation and benefit levels, developing performance
evaluations, setting up management and supervisory
structures, and providing conflict resolution services.
Making the best use of human resources means
maximizing their impact. Human resources can be
increased in LMICs and remote areas by using nonspecialists or general medical professionals working
under specific conditions. This practice promotes taskshifting and optimizes the use of sparse, highly skilled
personnel. For example, the use of community health
workers, expert patients, and clinical officers (Knaul,
Bhadelia, and others 2012) and, in some countries,
traditional healers who play an important role in influencing people’s health care decisions (Price and others
2012) will enhance the capacity for health care delivery.
Teleservices, such as telepathology, teleradiology, and
virtual consultation can offer support and guidance in
cancer to nonspecialists by tapping large international
networks of highly trained professionals.
Information Technology and Management
Information technology (IT) refers to systems and their
applications, for example, computer hardware and software and telecommunications that collect, store, use,
and share information. Information management refers
to organizing, linking, analyzing, and presenting data to
guide decisions.

In cancer centers, IT includes health records; operational systems, such as human resources, pharmacy,
supplies, and equipment; financing; and other systems.
IT also includes telemedicine and mobile information and communication technologies, such as cell
phones (mHealth), which improve access to services.
Telemedicine initiatives have the potential to decrease
disparities in cancer care between resource-poor and
resource-rich institutions by developing resources—
human capital and telecommunication infrastructure—
that link institutions with different levels of funding and
expertise (Hazin and Qaddoumi 2010).
Although IT requires funding for capital, training,
ongoing maintenance, and technical backup, cancer
centers need reliable electronic systems to manage the
high volumes of information; inform safe, efficient, and
effective care; and improve access. The systems can be
especially important in LMICs for linking comprehensive centers to more remote areas and less specialized
centers, as well as for linking to international expertise and networks (Knaul, Bhadelia, and others 2012;
Shekelle, Morton, and Keeler 2006).
Pharmacy
Pharmacy services focus on safe and effective medication use and include managing practice; adhering to policies on medication use; optimizing medication therapy;
procuring drug products and managing inventory; preparing, packaging, and labeling medications; delivering
medications; monitoring medication use; evaluating the
effectiveness of the medication-use system; and conducting research (American Society of Health-System
Pharmacists 2013).
Cancer pharmacy services reflect specialized knowledge about the medications used for cancer, management of cancer complications, treatment side effects,
and drug toxicities. The complexity of caring for patients
with cancer; the costs of chemotherapy; the potential
for severe drug toxicity and medication errors; and the
requirements for safe preparation, administration, and
disposal of cytotoxic drugs highlight the important role
of pharmacies in cancer centers, regardless of a country’s
resource level (Wiernikowski 2013). The International
Society of Oncology Pharmacy Practitioners has developed Standards of Oncology Pharmacy Practice that take
into account realities from resource-rich and resourcepoor settings.
Infection Control
Infection control is a core service that focuses on preventing and controlling infections in cancer patients,
including advice on the care of patients with infections, especially those acquired in the cancer center.

Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

201

Main infection prevention and control tactics include
complying with hand hygiene, disinfecting and sterilizing surfaces and equipment, investigating and monitoring suspected infections, managing difficult cases
and outbreaks, wearing personal protective equipment,
and vaccinating and educating health care providers.
For centers, this includes introducing prevention
bundles,9 improving compliance with hand hygiene,
making prudent use of antimicrobials, translating
research results into practice, and upgrading the capabilities of the microbiology laboratory (Raka 2010).
Quality Assurance
Cancer care has many potential risks. Complex clinical
management using multiple treatment paths and multiple health care providers highlights the importance of a
centerwide commitment to a quality and safety agenda
and ongoing performance improvement.
Centers need to select appropriate indicators to
monitor and assess the quality and effectiveness of their
structures (for example, setting and facilities), processes (range of care), and outcomes (patients’ recovery,
restoration of function, and survival) (Donabedian
1966). Information systems should capture baseline
performance measures for each indicator and track
changes over time. Cancer centers should regularly
monitor performance, identify problem areas, and focus
improvement efforts in these areas.
Finance
All cancer centers need competent financial systems to
monitor revenues and expenses. Sources of funding vary
widely and can include national and subnational government funding; private user payments, either through
health insurance or out of pocket; revenue-generating
practices, for example, retail and parking; and philanthropic support from external donors. Available finances
dictate the services that can be provided. Centers need
systems that allow effective and efficient operations and
ensure appropriate quality services to optimize the use
of funds.
Additional Key Supports
Additional key supports required in the cancer center include the following: equipment and technology
support services, supplies and materials management,
supply chain processes, patient transport, fire safety
and radiation protection, occupational health and
safety, and security. In areas of violence or conflict,
security services may be especially important for
patients and their families, as well as for guaranteeing the safety of health inputs and avoiding robbery.
National and regional bodies generally set policies

202

Cancer

and standards for areas such as fire safety and radiation protection, occupational health and safety, and
infection prevention and control. Organizations and
providers usually determine how the other ancillary
services will be provided, depending on local circumstances and resources.

CANCER CENTERS AND QUALITY OF CARE:
AN INTEGRATING THEME
Having well-developed and resourced centers and systems does not guarantee higher quality (Chalkidou and
others 2014; WHO 2006c). Indeed, high-quality care can
be achieved in centers with minimal resources.
Many organizations have highlighted issues and
impacts of quality in health care (IOM 2000, 2001) and
cancer care (IOM 2013). Poor quality of care can lead
to increased injury, morbidity, disability, and death for
patients. It also has financial, physical, and psychological
impacts on patients and families; financial impacts on
health care institutions and systems, especially if additional health services are needed; and economic impacts
on societies (IOM 2000). Definitions and frameworks,
along with quality measures, may also be influenced by
a variable focus on structures, processes, and outcomes
of quality.
A review of conceptual quality frameworks in
six Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development member countries (OECD, Kelley, and
Hurst 2006) identified the most commonly used dimensions of quality:
• Effectiveness: The degree of achieving desirable outcomes, given the correct provision of evidence-based
health care services to all who could benefit but not
to those who would not benefit
• Safety: The degree to which health care processes
avoid, prevent, and ameliorate adverse outcomes or
injuries that stem from the processes of health care
itself; closely related to effectiveness, albeit distinct
in its emphasis on preventing unintentional adverse
events for patients
• Responsiveness: The way a system treats people to
meet their legitimate non-health expectations; also
known as patient-centeredness
• Accessibility: The ease with which health services are
reached; can be physical, financial, or psychological
and requires health services to be a priority and
available
• Equity: Closely related to accessibility but assesses
health system financing and outcomes and health
status

• Efficiency: The system’s optimal use of available
resources to yield maximum benefits or results;
speaks to a system’s ability to function at lower cost
without diminishing attainable and desirable results.
Other dimensions of quality identified included
acceptability (related to patient-centeredness), appropriateness (related to effectiveness), competency or
capability (related to effectiveness), continuity (related
to patient-centeredness), and timeliness (related to
patient-centeredness).
External accreditation, regulatory, licensing, and professional and evidence-based clinical practice organizations and bodies require cancer centers to meet quality
standards for organizations and how they should operate.
Countries or regions may have general accreditation
standards as well as service-specific credentialing bodies10
(Econex 2010). These external organizations provide
cancer centers with arm’s-length quality reference points
to guide their operations. Accreditation is also an external motivator for quality reform and is consistently seen
as an effective driver for quality in LMICs (Barnett and
Hort 2013).

Catalyzing the Development of Effective National
Cancer Control Systems
A center’s critical mass of clinical management expertise
and clinical and core services results in effective and
efficient quality cancer control. Cancer centers can lead
the development of regional systems of cancer care, with
care ranging from very complex to basic interventions
and community-based care. Centers can contribute to
national cancer control efforts by being a credible voice
for public education on prevention and the signs, symptoms, and treatment of cancer. This contribution is especially important in LMICs, since many people present
with advanced or metastatic disease. The establishment
of regional cancer centers in every state of India illustrates
the important contribution of these centers to supporting
an effective national cancer control system (box 11.2).
Training Health Care Professionals
Comprehensive centers play a significant role educating a country’s health care professionals. In addition
to providing specialty training for individual professions, centers provide training on interprofessional

Box 11.2

Regional Cancer Centers in India
India’s active National Cancer Control Program was
launched by the government in 1975 and revised
in 1984. The main focus is primary prevention
and early detection of cancer, which includes the
following:
• Tobacco control measures to prevent tobaccorelated cancers
• Screening for cancers of the uterine cervix,
mouth, and breast
• Extending and strengthening therapeutic services
nationally through regional cancer centers (RCCs)
and medical colleges, including dental colleges.
The objectives of the program are to be met by
creating one RCC in every state and developing
oncology units in existing medical colleges across
the country.

The main functions of RCCs are cancer detection
and diagnosis, treatment, aftercare and rehabilitation, education and training, cancer registration,
and research. RCC core requirements include divisions of surgical oncology, radiation oncology, and
medical oncology, with support from the departments of anesthesiology, pathology, cytopathology,
hematology, biochemistry, and radiologic diagnosis,
with appropriate equipment and staff.
Oncology units in medical colleges form an important link between RCCs and the more peripheral
health infrastructure, that is, district hospitals, Tehsil
(regional) hospitals, and primary health centers.
This three-tier model will help to make cancer care
accessible across all socioeconomic groups and geographical areas.
At the peripheral level, a district cancer control
program was launched in 1990/91 with elements
box continues next page

Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

203

Box 11.2 (continued)
of health education, early detection, training
of medical and paramedic personnel, palliative
treatment and pain relief, coordination, and
monitoring.
Although the national cancer control program has
been beneficial, given the geographic expanse and
the vast population, cancer care facilities remain
unavailable to the majority of the population from
lower socioeconomic strata and those living in
remote areas. For example, global standards require
two radiotherapy treating units per 100,000 population; currently, India has 0.4 radiotherapy units
per 100,000.

team-based care. Other hospitals, community clinics,
and primary care can provide training placement
opportunities (Debas and others 2006). Trained professionals can take on various roles and responsibilities throughout the country. LMICs that wish to train
their own doctors need at least one teaching hospital
(Hensher, Price, and Adomakoh 2006), which, in most
instances, would include the comprehensive cancer
center. Given that every developing country will not be
able to train a full complement of health professionals
on its own (Frenk and others 2010) or train staff in
highly specialized skills, comprehensive cancer centers,
especially in developed countries, can be part of education consortia that extend beyond national borders.
For example, when the treatment of pediatric malignancy was expanded in Chile to include bone marrow
transplantation, clinical staff needed specialty training to support the development of this new program
(Palma and others 2006). In collaboration with St.
Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee,
pediatric oncologists, nurses, and other specialists—
immunologists, hematologists, intensivists, pathologists, and medical technologists—received training
from international institutions, including St. Jude, Vall
d’Hebron Hospital in Barcelona, and the Hospital de
Clínicas in Curitiba, Brazil. The experiences and survival
outcomes of the program have been positive.

Supporting the Development of Effective Health Care
Systems
Comprehensive cancer centers guide and support the
development of effective health systems. Centers model

204

Cancer

A wide disparity exists in the level of cancer care
across various centers in India. Efforts are underway to create a national cancer grid linking major
oncology centers across the country to facilitate the
following:
• Development of a cooperative cancer management network for the transfer of standard
treatment guidelines and expertise
• Facilitation of uniform standards for education,
training, and human resource development in
cancer care
• Creation of a cooperative oncology research network to conduct studies of national importance.

effective quality clinical management practices that are
transferrable to all health care services. In addition, many
of the clinical and core services in cancer centers—such
as diagnostic imaging, pathology, surgery, and palliative
care—can support other clinical programs. Similarly,
the referral systems that cancer centers establish with a
continuum of providers can meet other health needs.
Innovative financing of cancer services through comprehensive cancer centers can drive efforts to develop
financial protection in health as part of universal health
coverage. In Mexico, for example, pediatric and women´s
cancers were among the first to be included in Seguro
Popular, the national public insurance program focused
on the poor. The visibility and effectiveness of these
efforts helped to develop confidence among citizens, legislators, and policy makers alike regarding the feasibility
and importance of establishing financial protection in
health (Atun and Knaul 2012; Knaul, González-Pier, and
others 2012).

Contributing to Global Health
Comprehensive cancer centers can make important contributions to global health and health systems. Centers
can contribute to broad global efforts to improve health
(Frenk and Moon 2013). International health organizations that cross national boundaries can benefit from
the participation of centers in such areas as research and
development and sharing of information for ongoing
learning (Blanchet and others 2013; Jamison, Frenk, and
Knaul 1998).
Successfully developing comprehensive cancer
centers in LMICs requires locally developed and

driven approaches that consider national and subnational resources and circumstances. Gupta and others
(chapter 7, this volume) identify the basic personnel
and infrastructure requirements for the ideal dedicated
childhood cancer treatment center in an LMIC setting.
The authors note that satellite centers can be especially
important for decreasing the abandonment of treatment for children and recognize that much treatment
occurs despite the lack of ideal centers. Many LMICs
have leveraged the experience, expertise, and resources
of high-income countries to develop cancer services.
For example, twinning relationships can facilitate the

development of cancer centers and help to achieve a
country’s cancer goals (Gralow and others 2012; Sloan
and Gelband 2007). Furthermore, research suggests
that twinning improves cancer survival in LMICs
(Hazin and Qaddoumi 2010). Box 11.3 provides
examples of beneficial twinning relationships.
Other LMICs have raised funds locally to finance the
development of cancer center services. Box 11.4 presents
the experience of establishing the Fakous Cancer Center
in the Arab Republic of Egypt, which integrates cancer
treatment with primary health care to help prevent and
treat cancer in a low-resource setting.

Box 11.3

Twinning Relationships
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital’s
International Outreach Program and 20 Partners
The St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital’s
International Outreach Program improves the
survival rates of children with catastrophic illnesses worldwide by transferring knowledge, technology, and organizational skills to countries and
regions, so they can become self-sufficient and
successfully treat children close to home. The
program involves local communities, supports the
development of regional expertise and diagnostic
capabilities, partners with medical institutions
and fundraising organizations, and facilitates the
involvement of other agencies and organizations
to support key programs and the education of
local personnel.
Located in Memphis, Tennessee, the program
has pediatric oncology twinning programs with
20 partner sites in 14 countries, including Brazil,
Chile, China, Costa Rica, Ecuador, El Salvador,
Guatemala, Honduras, Jordan, Lebanon, Mexico,
Morocco, the Philippines, and the República
Bolivariana de Venezuela. The results have been
significant; survival rates for childhood cancers
increased and the rate of abandonment of treatment decreased. For example, the abandonment
rate in El Salvador dropped from 13 percent to
3 percent from 2010 to 2012, and the five-year

survival rate for children with acute lymphoblastic
leukemia increased from 10 percent to 70 percent.a
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center and
Uganda Cancer Institute
The Uganda Cancer Institute (UCI), the only cancer
treatment and training facility in the country
of 32 million people, partnered with the Fred
Hutchinson Cancer Research Center in Seattle,
Washington, to establish the UCI/Hutchinson
Center Cancer Alliance in 2004. The alliance
focuses on developing effective prevention and
treatment strategies for infection-associated
cancers through the following activities:
• Conducting advanced research in infectionrelated cancers to improve understanding of the
pathogenesis of these diseases and to develop
and test more effective and safer treatment and
prevention regimens
• Improving clinical capacity by providing medical
support and revised clinical protocols for those
with infectious cancers
• Training cancer specialists, scientists, and support
staff in Uganda to increase local human capacity
for clinical care and research at UCI and providing a training environment for United States–
based personnel in Uganda.b
box continues next page

Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

205

Box 11.3 (continued)
Victoria Hospice and B. P. Koirala Memorial
Cancer Hospital, Bharatpur, Nepal
The International Network for Cancer Treatment
and Research established the Palliative Access
Program to assist developing countries in initiating
and sustaining palliative care programs. In 2007,
the B. P. Koirala Memorial Cancer Hospital, Nepal’s
national cancer hospital, expressed a desire to
twin with a hospice to help expand its patient
care services, develop education and research, and
introduce home and community-based palliative
care services. The hospital—which has a 12-bed
inpatient palliative care unit and provides inpatient
and outpatient consultations—twinned with
Victoria Hospice in Victoria, British Columbia,

Canada. Funds have been raised to help support
the hospital’s patient care services and increase
health professional education. Medical supplies
have been purchased, local staff have been hired and
trained, travel funds have been provided for staff
training opportunities, and educational material
has been provided and adapted. In addition, the
partners exchange mutually beneficial knowledge
and expertise in palliative care.c
a. For additional information, see: http://www.stjude.org/stjude/v/index.jsp
?vgnextoid=2f166f9523e70110VgnVCM1000001e0215acRCRD&vgnextchannel
=e41e6fa0a9118010VgnVCM1000000e2015acRCRD.
b. For additional information, see: http://www.fredhutch.org/en/labs/vaccine-and
-infectious-disease/international-programs/global-oncology/uganda/uci-fred
-hutch.html.
c. For additional information, see https://sites.google.com/site/nepalhospicetwin.

Box 11.4

The Fakous Cancer Center
In Fakous district in the northeast of the Arab
Republic of Egypt, breast cancer is the most common cancer. Until the center was opened in 1992, the
closest cancer treatment for the largely poor population of 660,000 was the National Cancer Institute
in Cairo. It was a three-hour trip and a world apart,
and most cancer patients went untreated.
One of many challenges confronted in building
the Fakous Cancer Center was financing. Using
“crowd sourcing,” one million Egyptian pounds
(US$330,000) was raised in the first two months,
and donations continued to come in. A second
challenge was finding doctors to work in the center.
In place of permanent staff, specialists from the
National Cancer Institute and various universities
come to the center to perform surgery and provide
other specialized treatment. The Fakous Cancer
Center has become a center of excellence in training as well as treatment. The third challenge, the
retention of good nursing staff, was accomplished
through the establishment of a nursing school.
The Fakous model integrates third-level services
with primary health care, taking prevention and

206

Cancer

treatment to less developed parts of the country.
The center has 80 beds; three operating rooms;
an eight-bed intensive care unit; basic diagnostic facilities with conventional X-ray; ultrasound
for ultrasound-guided biopsy, mammography, and
endoscopy; and a histopathology unit equipped
to provide cytology, tissue analysis, and hormone
receptor assays, as well as treatment modalities. Social support of cancer patients’ families is
also provided.
The center’s outpatient facilities provide free clinical
consultations for poor patients, who constitute the
majority in this region—nearly 230,000 outpatients
in the past 22 years. The inpatient wards have seen
29,000 patients admitted.
Care at the center is reflected in survival statistics:
for women treated for breast cancer in 2008, the
five-year survival is 89 percent for stage I, 77 percent
for stage II, 71 percent for stage III, and 19 percent
for stage IV. A recent study of the experience of the
center also documents stage shift at diagnosis from
the time the center was opened through 2007–08
(Omar and others 2013).

CONCLUSIONS
The optimal framework for establishing a comprehensive cancer center provides the nucleus around which an
entire cancer control program can be developed. Many
LMICs are developing comprehensive cancer centers
supported with public and private resources, and these
countries are using locally driven approaches appropriate to their local circumstances. Most important, they
are having significant impacts on advancing cancer
control and improving the health of their populations.

NOTES
World Bank Income Classifications as of July 2014 are as follows, based on estimates of gross national income (GNI) per
capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries (LICs) = US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries (MICs) are subdivided:
a) lower-middle-income = US$1,046–US$4,125
b) upper-middle-income (UMICs) = US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries (HICs) = US$12,746 or more.
1. For the Cochrane Collaboration, see http://www
.cochrane.org/cochrane-reviews. For the U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force, see http://www.uspreventiveservices
taskforce.org/recommendations.htm. For Cancer Care
Ontario, see https://www.cancercare.on.ca/cms/One
.aspx?portalId=1377&pageId=10144.
2. For example, see the Royal College of Radiologists,
http://www.rcr.ac.uk/index.aspx, and the American
College of Radiology, http://www.acr.org/Quality-Safety
/Standards-Guidelines.
3. For example, see the Oncology Nursing Society, http://www
.ons.org/ClinicalResources; European Oncology Nursing
Society, http://www.cancernurse.eu/education/guidelines
.html; and Association of Oncology Social Work, http://www
.aosw.org/aosw/Main/professionals/standards-of-practice
/AOSWMain/Professional-Development/standards-of-practice.
aspx?hkey=51fda308-28bd-48b0-8a75-a17d01251b5e.
4. See http://www.nccn.org/international/international
_adaptations.asp.
5. See https://tmc.gov.in/clinicalguidelines/clinical.htm.
6. For example, see the Joint Commission International,
http://www.jointcommissioninternational.org/achieve
-accreditation/; National Accreditation Board for Hospitals
and Healthcare Providers International, http://www.nabh
.co/Index.aspx; and Accreditation Canada International,
http://www.internationalaccreditation.ca/en/home.aspx.
7. For example, see the International Federation of Clinical
Chemistry and Laboratory Medicine, http://www.ifcc
.org/executive-board-and-council/regional-federations
/efcc-european-federation-of-clinical-chemistry/; National
Accrediting Agency for Clinical Laboratory Sciences,
http://www.naacls.org/; and National Accreditation Board

for Testing and Calibration Laboratories, http://www
.nabl-india.org/.
8. See, for example, http://www.asco.org/institute-quality
/asco-ons-standards-safe-chemotherapy-administration.
9. Bundles focus on aseptic procedures that potentially
carry a high risk of hospital-related infection, for example, catheter-associated bloodstream infection, catheterassociated urinary tract infection, ventilator-associated
pneumonia, and surgical site infections.
10. A number of accreditation bodies have international
accreditation programs to inform centers in countries where national accreditation does not exist. See,
for example, Joint Commission International, http://
www .jointcommissioninternational.org/achieve
-accreditation/; Accreditation Canada International,
http://www.internationalaccreditation.ca/en/home.aspx;
and National Accreditation Board for Hospitals and
Healthcare Providers, http://www.nabh.co/.

REFERENCES
American Society of Health-System Pharmacists. 2013.
“ASHP Guidelines: Minimum Standard for Pharmacies in
Hospitals.” American Journal of Health-System Pharmacy
70: 1619–30.
Anderson, B. O., J. Lipscomb, R. H. Murillo, and D. B. Thomas.
2015. “Breast Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities (third
edition): Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Anderson, B. O., C. H. Yip, R. A. Smith, R. Shyyan, S. F. Sener,
and others. 2008. “Guideline Implementation for Breast
Healthcare in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries:
Overview of the Breast Health Global Initiative Global
Summit 2007.” Cancer 113 (8 Suppl.): 2221–43. doi:10.1002
/cncr.23844.
Atun, R., and F. M. Knaul. 2012. “Innovative Financing:
Local and Global Opportunities.” In Closing the Cancer
Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited by F. M. Knaul,
J. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadelia, for the Global Task
Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control in
Developing Countries, chapter 8. Boston, MA: Harvard
Global Equity Initiative.
Baldrige Performance Excellence Program, National Institute
of Standards and Technology, and U.S. Department of
Commerce. 2011. 2011–2012 Health Care Criteria for
Performance Excellence. Gaithersburg, MD: Baldrige. http://
www.nist.gov/baldrige/publications/archive/2011_2012
_healthcare_criteria.cfm.
Barnett, C., and K. Hort. 2013. “Approaches to Regulating
the Quality of Hospital Services in Low- and MiddleIncome Countries with Mixed Health Systems:
A Review of Their Effectiveness, Context of Operation
and Feasibility.” Working Paper Series 32, The Nossal
Institute for Global Health, University of Melbourne,
Australia. http://ni.unimelb.edu.au/__data/assets/pdf
_file/0010/834418/WP_32.pdf.

Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

207

Blanchet, N., M. Thomas, R. Atun, D. T. Jamison, F. Knaul,
and others. 2013. “Global Collection Action in Health:
The WDR+20 Landscape of Core and Supportive
Functions.” Working Paper, The Lancet Commission on
Investing in Health.
Cancer Care Ontario. 2013. “The Cancer Journey.” https://
www.cancercare.on.ca/ocs/csoverview/.
Carlson, J. W., E. Lyon, D. Walton, W.-C. Foo, A. C. Sievers, and
others. 2010. “Partners in Pathology: A Collaborative Model
to Bring Pathology to Resource Poor Settings.” American
Journal of Surgical Pathology 34 (1): 118–23.
Carter, K., S. Dorgan, and D. Layton. 2011. “Why Hospital
Management Matters.” Health International, McKinsey’s
Health Systems and Services Practice, McKinsey and
Company, London.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. 2013. “Basic
Information about Cancer Survivorship.” http://www.cdc
.gov/cancer/survivorship/basic_info/index.htm.
Chalkidou, K., P. Marquez, P. K. Dhillon, Y. Teerawattananon,
T. Anothaisintawee, and others. 2014. “Evidence-Informed
Frameworks for Cost-Effective Cancer Care and Prevention
in Low, Middle, and High-Income Countries.” The Lancet
Oncology 15 (3): e119–31. http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/S1470
-2045(13)70547-3.
Cleary, J., H. Gelband, and J. Wagner. 2015. “Cancer Pain Relief.”
In Disease Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 3,
Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Dalglish, S. L., M. N. Poulsen, and P. J. Winch. 2013.
“Localization of Health Systems in Low- and MiddleIncome Countries in Response to Long-Term Increases in
Energy Prices.” Globalization and Health 9: 56. http://www
.globalizationandhealth.com/content/9/1/56.
Dare, A. J., B. O. Anderson, R. Sullivan, C. S. Pramesh,
C.-H. Yip, and others. 2015. “Surgical Services for
Cancer Care.” In Disease Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Debas, H. T., R. Gosselin, C. McCord, and A. Thind. 2006.
“Surgery.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing
Countries, 2nd ed., edited by D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman,
A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha,
A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 1245–59. Washington, DC:
World Bank and Oxford University Press.
Donabedian, A. 1966. “Evaluating the Quality of Medical
Care.” Milbank Memorial Fund Quarterly 44 (3 Suppl.):
166–203.
Econex. 2010. Accreditation of Healthcare Providers. Health
Reform Note 2. http://econex.co.za/publication/health-reform
-note-2/.
El Saghir, N. S., C. A. Adebamowo, B. O. Anderson,
R. W. Carlson, P. A. Bird, and others. 2011. “Breast
Cancer Management in Low Resource Countries (LRCs):
Consensus Statement from the Breast Health Global
Initiative.” The Breast 20 (Suppl. 2): S3–11.
Farmer, P., J. Frenk, F. M. Knaul, L. N. Shulman, G. Alleyne,
and others. 2010. “Expansion of Cancer Care and Control

208

Cancer

in Countries of Low and Middle Income: A Call to
Action.” The Lancet 376 (9747): 1186–93. doi:10.1016
/S0140-6736(10)61152-X.
Frenk, J., L. Chen, Z. A. Bhutta, J. Cohen, N. Crisp, and
others. 2010. “Health Professionals for a New Century:
Transforming Education to Strengthen Health Systems in
an Interdependent World.” The Lancet 376: 1923–58.
Frenk, J., and S. Moon. 2013. “Governance Challenges in
Global Health.” The New England Journal of Medicine 368
(10): 936–42.
Gawande, A. 2009. The Checklist Manifesto: How to Get Things
Right. London: Metropolitan Books.
Gralow, J. R., E. Krakauer, B. O. Anderson, A. Ilbawi, P. Porter,
and others. 2012. “Core Elements for Provision of Cancer
Care and Control in Low and Middle Income Countries.”
In Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited
by F. M. Knaul, J. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadelia, for the
Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and
Control in Developing Countries, 125–65. Boston, MA:
Harvard Global Equity Initiative.
Grimes, C. E., K. G. Bowman, C. M. Dodgion, and C. B. D. Lavy.
2011. “Systematic Review of Barriers to Surgical Care
in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries.” World
Journal of Surgery 35: 941–50.
Gupta, S., M. Bonilla, P. Valverde, L. Fu, S. C. Howard, and
others. 2012. “Treatment-Related Mortality in Children
with Acute Myeloid Leukaemia in Central America:
Incidence, Timing and Predictors.” European Journal of
Cancer 48: 1363–69.
Haynes, A. B., T. G. Weiser, W. R. Berry, S. R. Lipsitz,
A. H. Breizat, and others. 2009. “A Surgical Safety Checklist
to Reduce Morbidity and Mortality in a Global Population.”
New England Journal of Medicine 360: 491–99.
Hazin, R., and I. Qaddoumi. 2010. “Teleoncology: Current and
Future Applications for Improving Cancer Care Globally.”
The Lancet Oncology 11 (2): 204–10.
Hensher, M., M. Price, and S. Adomakoh. 2006. “Referral
Hospitals.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing
Countries, 2nd ed., edited by D. T. Jamison, J. G. Breman,
A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha,
A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 1229–43. Washington, DC:
World Bank and Oxford University Press.
IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency). 2008. Setting
Up a Radiotherapy Programme: Clinical, Medical Physics,
Radiation Protection and Safety Aspects. Vienna: IAEA.
———. 2010. AGaRT (The Advisory Group on increasing
access to Radiotherapy Technology in low and middle
income countries). Brochure. http://cancer.iaea.org
/documents/AGaRTBrochure.pdf.
IOM (Institute of Medicine). 2000. To Err Is Human: Building
a Safer Health System, edited by L. T. Kohn, J. M. Corrigan,
and M. S. Donaldson. Washington, DC: National Academies
Press.
———. 2001. Crossing the Quality Chasm: A New Health
System for the 21st Century. Washington, DC: National
Academies Press.
———. 2013. Delivering High-Quality Cancer Care:
Charting a New Course for a System in Crisis. Washington,

DC: National Academies Press. http://www.nap.edu/catalog
.php?record_id=18359.
Jamison, D. T., J. Frenk, and F. Knaul. 1998. “International
Collective Action in Health: Objectives, Functions, and
Rationale.” The Lancet 351: 514–17.
Kerr, D. J., and R. Midgley. 2010. “Can We Treat Cancer for a
Dollar a Day? Guidelines for Low-Income Countries.” New
England Journal of Medicine 363 (9): 801–03.
Knaul, F. M., G. Alleyne, R. Atun, F. Bustreo, J. R. Gralow, and
others. 2012. “Strengthening Stewardship and Leadership to
Expand Access to Cancer Care and Control.” In Closing the
Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited by F. M. Knaul,
J. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadelia, for the Global Task
Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control
in Developing Countries, 311–42. Boston, MA: Harvard
Global Equity Initiative.
Knaul, F. M., G. Alleyne, P. Piot, R. Atun, J. R. Gralow, and
others. 2012. “Health System Strengthening and Cancer:
A Diagonal Response to the Challenge of Chronicity.”
In Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited
by F. M. Knaul, J. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadelia, for the
Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and
Control in Developing Countries, 95–124. Boston, MA:
Harvard Global Equity Initiative.
Knaul, F. M., A. Bhadelia, R. Bashshur, A. J. Berger,
A. Binagwaho, and others. 2012. “Innovative Delivery of
Cancer Care and Control in Low-Resource Scenarios.” In
Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited by
F. M. Knaul, J. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadelia, for the
Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and
Control in Developing Countries, 165–95. Boston, MA:
Harvard Global Equity Initiative.
Knaul, F. M., E. González-Pier, O. Gómez-Dantés, D. GarcíaJunco, H. Arreola-Ornelas, and others. 2012. “The Quest for
Universal Health Coverage: Achieving Social Protection for
All in Mexico.” The Lancet 380 (9849): 1259–79.
Knaul, F. M., J. R. Gralow, R. Atun, A. Bhadelia, J. Frenk,
and others. 2012. “Closing the Cancer Divide: Overview
and Summary.” In Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity
Imperative, edited by F. M. Knaul, J. Gralow, R. Atun, and
A. Bhadelia, for the Global Task Force on Expanded Access
to Cancer Care and Control in Developing Countries, 3–28.
Boston, MA: Harvard Global Equity Initiative.
Konduri, N., J. Quick, J. R. Gralow, M. Samiei, P. Castle, and
others. 2012. “Access to Affordable Medicines, Vaccines,
and Health Technologies.” In Closing the Cancer Divide:
An Equity Imperative, edited by F. M. Knaul, J. Gralow,
R. Atun, and A. Bhadelia, for the Global Task Force
on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control in
Developing Countries, 197–256. Boston, MA: Harvard
Global Equity Initiative.
Lingard, L., G. Regehr, C. Cartmill, B. Orser, S. Espin, and
others. 2011. “Evaluation of a Preoperative Team Briefing:
A New Communication Routine Results in Improved
Clinical Practice.” BMJ Quality & Safety 20: 475–82.
Lingard, L., G. Regehr, B. Orser, R. Reznick, G. R. Baker, and
others. 2008. “Evaluation of a Preoperative Checklist
and Team Briefing among Surgeons, Nurses, and

Anesthesiologists to Reduce Failures in Communication.”
Archives of Surgery 143 (1): 12–17.
Masood, S., L. Vass, J. A. Ibarra, B. M. Ljung, H. Stalsberg, and
others, on behalf of the Breast Health Global Initiative
Pathology Focus Group. 2008. “Breast Pathology Guideline
Implementation in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.”
Cancer 113 (Suppl. 8): 2297–304.
Mavalankar, D. V., K. V. Ramani, A. Patel, and P. Sankar.
2005. Building the Infrastructure to Reach and Care for
the Poor: Trends, Obstacles and Strategies to Overcome
Them. Ahmedabad, India: Center for Management of
Health Services, Indian Institute of Management. http://
www. iimahd .ernet.in /publications/data/2005-03-01
mavalankar.pdf.
National Cancer Institute (National Institutes of Health, U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services). 2012. The
National Cancer Program: Managing the Nation’s Research
Portfolio. An Annual Plan and Budget Proposal for Fiscal
Year 2013. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of Health
(NIH Publication No. 13-7957).
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development), E. Kelley, and J. Hurst. 2006. “OECD Health
Care Quality Indicators Project Conceptual Framework
Paper.” OECD, Paris.
Omar, A., M. Abdelgawad, M. Aboserea, and O. Omar. 2013.
“Breast Cancer Experience at Fakous Cancer Center (FCC).”
Pan Arab Journal Oncology 6 (3): 12–17.
Palma, J., C. Mosso, C. Paris, M. Campbell, X. Tong, and others.
2006. “Establishment of a Pediatric HSCT Program in a
Public Hospital in Chile.” Pediatric Blood Cancer 46: 803–10.
Price, A. J., P. Ndom, E. Atenguena, J. P. M. Nouemssi, and
R. W. Ryder. 2012. “Cancer Care Challenges in Developing
Countries.” Cancer 118: 3627–35.
Radiation Safety Institute of Canada. 2014. Canadian and
Provincial Regulatory Documents. http://www.radiation
safety.ca/resources/regulatory-documents.
Raka, L. 2010. “Prevention and Control of Hospital-Related
Infections in Low and Middle Income Countries.” The
Open Infectious Diseases Journal 4: 125–31.
Shekelle P., S. C. Morton, and E. B. Keeler. 2006. “Costs
and Benefits of Health Information Technology. Rockville
(MD): Agency for Healthcare Research and Quality.”
Evidence Reports/Technology Assessments, 132. http://
www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK37988/ and Benefits of
Health Information Technology.
Sloan, F. A., and H. Gelband. 2007. Cancer Control Opportunities
in Low- and Middle-Income Countries. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
Valentini, V., M. C. Barba, and M. A. Gambacorta. 2010. “The
Role of Multimodality Treatment in M0 Rectal Cancer:
Evidence and Research.” European Review for Medical and
Pharmacological Sciences 14 (4): 334–41.
Varughese, J., and S. Richman. 2010. “Cancer Care Inequity for
Women in Resource-Poor Countries.” Reviews in Obstetrics
and Gynecology 3 (3): 122–32.
Wee, J. T., B. O. Anderson, J. Corry, A. D’Cruz, K. C. Soo,
and others. 2009. “Management of the Neck after
Chemoradiotherapy for Head and Neck Cancers in Asia:

Cancer Services and the Comprehensive Cancer Center

209

Consensus Statement from the Asian Oncology Summit
2009.” The Lancet Oncology 10 (11): 1086–92.
Weiser, T. G., and A. Gawande. “Excess Surgical Mortality:
Strategies for Improving Quality of Care.” 2015. In Disease
Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 1, Essential
Surgery. Washington, DC: World Bank.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006a. Palliative
Care: Cancer Control—Knowledge into Action. WHO
Guide for Effective Programs: Module 5. Geneva: WHO.
http://www.who.int/cancer/publications/cancer_control
_palliative/en/index.html.
———. 2006b. Planning: Cancer Control—Knowledge into
Action. WHO Guide for Effective Programmes: Module 1.
Geneva: WHO. http://www.who.int/cancer/publications
/cancer_control_planning/en/index.html.
———. 2006c. Quality of Care: A Process for Making
Strategic Choices in Health Systems. Geneva: WHO.

210

Cancer

http://www .who .int/management/quality/assurance/
QualityCare_B.Def.pdf.
———. 2012. Assessing National Capacity for the Prevention
and Control of Noncommunicable Diseases: Report of the
2010 Global Survey. Geneva: WHO.
Wiernikowski, J. T. 2013. “Equitable Access to Chemotherapy,
Supportive Care Drugs and Pharmaceutical Care: A
Challenge for Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Cancer
Control 146. http://globalhealthdynamics.co.uk/cc2013
/wp-content/uploads/2013/04/146-isopp.pdf.
World Alliance for Patient Safety. 2008. Implementation Manual:
WHO Surgical Safety Checklist, 1st ed. Geneva: World
Health Organization. http://www.who.int/patientsafety
/safesurgery/ss_checklist/en/index.html.
Zaidi, Z. 2010. “Accreditation Standards for Medical Imaging
Services.” Indian Journal of Radiology and Imaging 20 (2):
89–91.

Chapter

12

Screening for Cancer: Considerations for
Low- and Middle-Income Countries
Terrence Sullivan, Richard Sullivan, and Ophira M. Ginsburg

INTRODUCTION
The goal of cancer screening is to detect cancer or
precancerous lesions in asymptomatic individuals at
a point when cancer is more likely to be prevented
or cured than if the patient waited for symptoms to
develop (Morrison 1992). A screening intervention can
be successful only if the disease is more likely to be cured
when detected early, and for which effective treatment for
early-stage disease is available, affordable, and acceptable
to the individual, the community, and the jurisdiction of
interest. This chapter briefly describes the principles and
pitfalls of cancer screening, based largely on the experience in high-income countries (HICs); summarizes
the evidence for screening “best buys” relevant to lowand middle-income countries (LMICs); and highlights
opportunities to avoid some of the costly and vexatious
problems associated with screening in HICs and LMICs.
The chapter focuses principally on existing projects and
recent literature on cancer screening in LMICs.
Policy considerations regarding whether and in what
manner to implement a cancer screening program
should be based on systematic evaluation of several
factors, including at a minimum: the burden of the
cancer in the population of interest (those at risk),
the cost effectiveness of the proposed screening intervention, and how well a given screening test performs
in the target population. How well the test works can
be judged by how many individuals must be screened to

prevent one death from that cancer, balanced with how
many people who undergo screening have a positive
or abnormal test result when they do not have cancer
(false-positive test), and how many have a normal result
when they in fact do have cancer (false-negative test).
The number of individuals with positive results who will
actually proceed to follow up and receive treatment is a
critical issue to consider for a given population. Other
critical considerations include the cost effectiveness of a
screening intervention when moving from initial trials
to scale and the health system requirements needed to
ensure the success of a given program. (See chapters 11,
16, and 17 for more on health systems.)
In this chapter, we selected three cancer sites for
which there is the most evidence for screening effectiveness in LMICs—breast, cervical, and colorectal—and
three promising candidate conditions.

DEFINITIONS OF AND CRITERIA FOR
CANCER SCREENING
Opportunistic versus Organized Screening
Opportunistic screening or case finding occurs when
an asymptomatic individual actively seeks a screening
procedure or a health professional offers a screening test
to an asymptomatic individual.
Organized screening occurs when there is an organized, population-based program with a structured

Corresponding author: Terrence Sullivan, PhD, terrence.sullivan@utoronto.ca

211

public health approach. Organized screening has six
elements (IARC 2005):
• An explicit policy that specifies eligible age categories,
methods, and screening intervals
• A defined target population
• A dedicated and responsible management team
responsible for implementation
• Associated teams for decision and care
• Specified methods for quality assurance
• Screening methods to identify cancer occurrence in
the target population.
In population-based screening, the elements of the
screening pathway are planned for an entire population
and are delivered, monitored, and evaluated for effectiveness and quality to ensure that the benefits are maximized in a cost-effective way. Although the approach to
implementation may be phased or staged geographically
or by age intervals, the intention for population screening is to capture all at-risk individuals in the appropriate
age interval. Organized screening is expensive and can
succeed only if adequate resources exist to achieve the
full trajectory of screening, with program quality assurance, including effective reach to all in the target population group (appropriate age, gender, and risk category)
and follow-up for disease assessment, diagnosis, and
treatment if disease is discovered.
High-risk screening targets known subpopulations
of men or women who may be at considerably higher
risk for specific cancer because of their genetic or risk
exposure backgrounds. In HICs, such high-risk screening has included known single-gene mutations associated with breast or ovarian cancer—such as BRCA1
and BRCA2 mutations, or family history of breast
or ovarian cancer—as well as similarly rare forms
of hereditary colon cancers. In LMICs, a pragmatic
example of screening of high-risk groups in South and
Southeast Asia for oral cancer could apply to heavy
smokers and drinkers who chew betel, areca nut, paan,
and gutka.
The target age range of a screening program depends
on several factors, including the following:
• Burden of the cancer in a given population
• Age-specific trends of the cancer, which may vary
widely between countries
• Screening modality, the type of test used, for example, visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA) versus
human papilloma virus (HPV) testing or combinations of these for cervical cancer
• Considerations regarding the capacity of local health
systems.

212

Cancer

Cervical cancer screening should begin only after a
woman has become sexually active. When considering the
choice of screening method, HPV screening is not advised
until a woman is 30 years of age, as younger women are
more likely to naturally “clear” the virus through the
immune system. Overtreatment, particularly of young
women, may lead to fertility problems in the future
(chapter 4 in this volume [Denny and others 2015]).
The optimal frequency or interval for cancer
screening depends on the capacity of the health
system, as well as the cancer’s natural history, which
includes the rate of growth. Fast-growing cancers are
less amenable to screening, while slower-growing,
indolent cancers with a more predictable natural
history (for example, colonic polyps or cervical precancerous lesions) are more obvious candidates for
a screening intervention (Esserman, Thompson, and
Reid 2013). Breast cancer has many different subtypes
(for example, estrogen and/or progesterone receptor
positive and negative, her2neu positive and negative) with a broad range of growth rates, patterns of
spread (metastases), and prognoses (Carey and others
2006; Van de Vijver and others 2002). This complex
natural history of breast cancer and the expense of
subtyping breast cancer are among the reasons for
the ongoing debate regarding the utility of screening
mammography in HICs.
It is important to consider potential sources of bias
when evaluating the effectiveness of organized cancer
screening programs. Three such forms of bias are leadtime bias, length bias, and overdiagnosis.
• Lead-time bias
Survival time for cancer patients is usually measured
from the day the cancer is diagnosed until the day
they die. Patients are often diagnosed after they
have symptoms. If a screening test leads to a diagnosis before symptoms develop, the survival time is
increased because the date of diagnosis is earlier. This
increase in survival time makes it seem as though
screened patients are living longer when that may
not be the case. This is called lead-time bias. Screened
patients may die at the same time they would have
without the screening test.
Lead-time bias has been a particular challenge
for screening with prostate specific antigen in HICs.
As part of the American Board of Internal Medicine’s
Choosing Wisely campaign, the American Society
of Clinical Oncology added prostate screening to its
updated “Top Five List” of oncology practices that
should be stopped because they are not supported by
the evidence or are considered wasteful (Schnipper
and others 2013).

• Length bias
Another source of potential bias is apparent when
screening detects mostly indolent, slowly progressive
tumors while missing the more aggressive ones. As an
example, some types of breast cancer are indolent and
can be asymptomatic for years; others are much more
aggressive and have a far shorter asymptomatic period.
The latter are more likely to cause symptoms between
screening intervals and may cause a patient to seek
medical attention prior to ever participating in cancer
screening. Consequently, a screening test will detect
more slow-growing than fast-growing cancers, giving
a false impression that screening lengthens survival,
when in fact it is merely detecting a subset of a more
treatable disease (Family Practice Notebook 2011).
• Overdiagnosis
Interest in cancer screening in LMICs is growing
at a time when concerns about overdiagnosis and
overtreatment, with resulting costs to the health care
system, as well as the psychosocial, physical, and economic risks incurred by individuals are increasingly
a matter of concern in HICs. Overdiagnosis is the
diagnosis of disease that will never cause symptoms
or death during a patient’s lifetime. It can be viewed
as a side effect of testing for early forms of disease
that may turn people into patients unnecessarily and
may lead to treatments that do no good and perhaps
do harm. This is especially relevant for breast and
prostate cancer (Esserman, Thompson, and Reid
2013; Welch, Schwartz, and Woloshin 2011; Yaffe and
Pritchard 2014). Overdiagnosis in breast screening is
discussed further in the section on breast screening
in this chapter.
Another important debate in HICs is about how
much screening causes harm from a false-positive
screening test, which often leads to significant waittimes for additional imaging tests and/or a tissue
biopsy for what ultimately proves to be a benign finding. False-positive screens must be balanced against the
benefits conferred by finding screen-detected cancers
that genuinely extend survival and reduce mortality.
Criteria for Cancer Screening
Screening for cancer can be effective if the criteria are
met. The Wilson-Junger (1968) criteria (box 12.1) set
out a series of considerations that, notwithstanding
updates in an era of molecular and genetic diagnostics,
remain worthy criteria to help make an assessment.
Modern variants of the criteria extend to the consideration of genetic susceptibility, in addition to preclinical
disease or precursors (Goel 2001).

Box 12.1

Principles of Early Disease Detection
Condition
• The condition should be an important health
problem.
• There should be a recognizable latent or early symptomatic stage.
• The natural history of the condition, including development from latent to declared disease, should be adequately understood.
Test
• There should be a suitable test or examination.
• The test should be acceptable to the population.
Treatment
• There should be an accepted treatment for patients with
recognized disease.
Screening Program
• There should be an established policy on whom to treat
as patients.
• Facilities for diagnosis and treatment should be
available. The cost of case-finding, including diagnosis
and treatment, should be economically balanced in
relation to possible expenditure on medical care as a
whole.
• Case-finding should be a continuing process and not a
“once and for all” project.
Source: Adapted from Wilson and Junger 1968.

SYSTEM REQUIREMENTS FOR ORGANIZED
CANCER SCREENING
Infrastructure, Education, and Advocacy
The reality in many LMICs is quite different from
that in HICs with longstanding cancer health promotion efforts and organized screening programs.
Organized approaches to screening risk straining the
burden on already thin health care and public health
resources. Delayed presentation for cancer is the norm
in many LMICs and within low-resource or geographically remote regions in upper-middle-income
countries. This delay exists for a variety of structural, equity, and sociocultural reasons (Knaul, Frenk,

Screening for Cancer: Considerations for Low- and Middle-Income Countries

213

and Shulman 2011; Story and others 2012). Structural
obstacles include the following:
• Strained health infrastructure, for example, the lack
of available human and technical resources for proper
diagnosis and disease management
• Long distances and poor road conditions that render
proper care inaccessible
• Sociocultural barriers, including extreme poverty,
myths, and stigma about cancer
• Gender inequity, which is especially relevant to
breast and cervical cancer (Errico and Rowden 2006;
Ginsburg 2013; Price and others 2012; Vorobiof,
Sitas, and Vorobiof 2001)
Such obstacles underscore the need to incorporate
a range of decisions in LMICs to inform the optimal
approach to screening. Options vary from an opportunistic case-finding approach, to a population-based
screening model, to a high-risk screening approach.
Regardless of the approach taken, a new cancer screening
program will contribute to increasing the number of
prevalent cases. This additional burden of disease can
be substantial and should be viewed as a potential strain
on local capacity at all levels—public health, primary
care, diagnostic, and treatment facilities. In regions with
severely constrained health infrastructure, the effects
of the screening program must be carefully considered prior to planning and implementing an organized
screening program. Decisions regarding the choice of
cancer sites, screening strategies, and target populations
should be informed not only by cost considerations, but
also by an understanding of the local burden of disease,
sociocultural contexts, health systems, infrastructure,
human resource capacity, community acceptability, and
local political will.
Irrespective of the approach to screening, to scale
up organized screening projects, initial plans require
rigorous evaluation as well as knowledge translation and
exchange to all relevant stakeholders, including community agencies and patient advocacy groups. Whether in
low-, middle-, or high-income settings, key factors for
community acceptance and success include early and
high levels of engagement with community and medical leaders, education, advocacy, and the establishment
of adequate infrastructure and information systems to
promote screening and capture initial diagnosis, treatment, and active follow-up information. Follow-up for
those with a positive (for example, abnormal) screening
test should include a well-developed care pathway to
ensure timely referrals for further evaluation, which may
include another imaging modality (for example, breast
ultrasound), a biopsy, or surgery, as well as a timely

214

Cancer

and accurate pathology result. For those with a cancer
diagnosis, appropriate referral for evidence-based and
resource-appropriate treatment planning is essential,
begging again the capacity to make it so in LMICs.
Those with a negative screening test should be offered
“invitations” for their next round of screening, according
to local guidelines (for example, a woman age 60 years
who is of average population risk can be invited by mail
or telephone to schedule her next screening mammogram two years from the last negative screen).
Cost-Effectiveness Considerations
Cost considerations should include excess direct and
indirect health care expenditures for cancers detected at
an advanced stage, including out-of-pocket expenses and
caregivers’ time away from work. Any analysis should
also consider the case for such investment, describing
macroeconomic cost models and potential savings from
treatment and prevention of cancer sites for which prevention or early detection can have the largest impact on
morbidity and mortality (Knaul, Frenk, and Shulman
2011). Estimated losses are presented with more- or lessconservative estimates of avoidable deaths.
According to these models for 2010, global
investments in cancer care and control might have
saved from US$10 million to US$230 million in
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs), or US$531 million
to almost US$1 trillion in value of statistical life.
Further, Knaul, Frenk, and Schulman (2011) highlight greater cost savings from adopting a prevention/
early detection-and-treatment approach versus a
treatment-only approach for breast and cervical cancer.
Cancer screening policy may be framed in terms of
investments, although the timeline to downstream
benefits (such as DALYs saved or citizens remaining
in the workforce longer) will certainly outspan the
political cycle and will depend on how robust and effective the screening program becomes. Cost-effectiveness
analysis should also consider the opportunity costs
of not screening, specifically for cancers where early
detection and appropriate treatment may significantly
improve survival rates, such as breast, cervical, and
colorectal cancer.
Ethical Considerations
In addition to economic considerations, ethical obligations require jurisdictions to ensure that benefits
outweigh harms and that the diagnostic and treatment
resources are sufficient to justify from the outset the
initiation of a screening program. Recently, some investigators have suggested that the informed population’s

preference should also be a factor in such deliberations
(Harris and others 2011). The informed population may
have a fair say in the design and buy-in for new screening
programs, but countries with established cancer screening policies may find it problematic to separate informed
preferences from the popular view that earlier detection
is invariably better.
This viewpoint is attributable in part to what Gilbert
Welch refers to as the popularity paradox, whereby
the very modest benefits of some forms of screening
are interpreted by the individuals who have detected
early-stage disease as having had their disease cured or
survival improved as a function of screening (Welch,
in Raffle and Gray 2007). Few cancer care professionals
and few screening policy makers will counter this view
publicly because there is no simple way other than the
fullness of time to fully determine whether the disease is
“cured.” Nor is there much compassion to be earned for
calling into question patients who optimistically, but in
many cases mistakenly, believe they have had their disease cured. Counterintuitively, the greater the extent of
overdiagnosis and overtreatment, the greater the number
of screened individuals who believe they owe their lives
to the screening program. While the popularity paradox
has been identified in HICs, this experience may provide
cautionary advice to LMICs that are contemplating
establishing screening programs. By contrast, high-risk
areas in LMICs consist of specific countries, regions, and
subpopulations that bear the disproportionate burden of
premature mortality in a range of lethal cancers, including liver, stomach, esophagus, and oral cancer.

CANCER SCREENING CANDIDATES IN LMICs
Overall and site-specific cancer mortality rates can
be gender-specific. For women in LMICs, breast and
cervical cancer are the leading causes of cancer death,
followed by lung, stomach, and liver cancer. For men in
these geographical areas, lung, liver, stomach, esophagus,
and colon cancer represent the highest mortality burden.
The following sections explore the value of screening
among several of these candidate conditions.

Breast Cancer
Breast cancer, the most common cancer in women
worldwide, is the leading cause of cancer deaths in
women in most jurisdictions with reliable data. More
than 50 percent of breast cancer deaths occur in LMICs.1
These rates will continue to grow with development
(Bray and others 2012), which has gone hand in hand
with the Westernization of diets and reproductive

patterns—fewer children, later first childbirth, and
shorter breastfeeding periods. These are factors that raise
the risk of breast cancer (Corbex, Burton, and SanchoGarnier 2012; Porter 2008).
The debate regarding overdiagnosis is of particular
relevance to breast cancer screening; it is estimated that
from 10 to 30 percent of breast cancer detected through
population-based screening mammography may never
have resulted in clinically significant disease but triggers
full-scale treatment.
A moderate view is that despite some limitations in
all screening studies, breast screening mammography
has benefits that outweigh harms, and a frank discussion
should take place between health care providers and
their patients, so that each woman can make an informed
decision. In 2012, the National Cancer Institute (U.S.)
convened a task force to address overdiagnosis in cancer
screening. The task force concluded that while screening
is intended to detect early-stage cancer to improve the
likelihood of cure, finding more indolent cancers with
“better biology” also contributes to better outcomes.
The task force suggested that policies be developed to
help mitigate the problems of overdetection and overtreatment, “while maintaining those gains by which early
detection is a major contributor to decreasing mortality
and locally advanced disease,” (Esserman, Thompson,
and Reid 2013, p. 798) and recommend that health care
providers and patients openly discuss the issues, which
the media should better understand and communicate
to the public.
Despite these controversies, breast cancer mortality
has been declining in many HICs where mammogram screening programs have been in place for over
20 years (OECD 2011). Many agree that this reflects
a combination of newer effective therapies, improved
breast awareness, and advocacy campaigns, but the
relative contribution of each of these factors is difficult to isolate (Kalager, Adami, and Bretthauer 2014).
Of relevance to LMICs, Kalager, Adami, and Bretthauer’s
commentary on the Canadian National Breast Screening
Study 25-year follow-up noted that the study lacked
a “mammogram only” arm, which limited the ability
to determine the effects of clinical breast examination
(CBE) alone versus mammography alone. The authors
allude to the potential risk of generalizing to other countries and suggest that early detection may be of greater
benefit in communities where most breast cancers
present clinically with more advanced disease. In regions
where no such advocacy and awareness campaigns
exist, it remains unclear how much early detection for
breast cancer (or other cancers for which screening is
promoted in HICs) can be achieved by a combination
of advocacy and awareness campaigns to reduce stigma

Screening for Cancer: Considerations for Low- and Middle-Income Countries

215

and overcome cancer myths, and by implementing
lower-cost but potentially effective screening interventions such as CBE.
The use of mammography for mass screening for
breast cancer requires expensive machinery, with its
own measurable risk, adequate distribution of radiologists and radiographers, and complex quality controls.
Moreover, as overall incidence rates remain lower in
LMICs relative to HICs and the average age of women
with breast cancer is lower than in HICs, the overall
benefit-to-harm ratio will be correspondingly lower
whether mammography or simpler techniques, such as
CBE with a skilled trainee, are used.
A recent systematic review of economic analyses
of breast cancer control in LMICs concludes that the
evidence base for guidance on screening modality
(for example, CBE versus mammography), the frequency
of screening, and the target population is limited and of
poor quality (Zelle and Baltussen 2013). Anderson and
others in chapter 3 explore in detail the most promising
of the early detection studies reviewed by Zelle and
Baltussen and recommend that early detection programs in LMICs be carefully designed to facilitate early
phase evaluation.
Self-screening or breast self-examination in LMICs
appears to present greater harms than benefits based on
one large Asian trial (Thomas and others 2002). A lower
risk of mortality or advanced breast cancer was found in
a meta-analysis of breast self-examination only in studies of women with breast cancer who reported practicing
breast self-examination before diagnosis (Hackshaw and
Paul 2003); no difference was found in the death rate in
studies on women who detected their cancer during an
examination. Despite conflicting evidence for CBE in
some low-income and lower-middle-income country
settings (Nguyen and others 2013; Pisani and others
2006), Anderson and others in chapter 3 of this volume
note that a case remains to be made for CBE as a means
of stage shifting, especially in populations where the
average tumor size at presentation is considerably larger
than that in most of the breast screening studies to date.
Reasonable evidence suggests that formal training in
CBE for primary care professionals can improve the
sensitivity of the procedure and reduce the number of
false positives (Vetto and others 2002).
The Breast Health Global Initiative has developed an
evidence-based, resource-stratified approach to early
detection and screening, as well as diagnosis, treatment,
and most recently, supportive care and quality of life
(Anderson 2013). Recommendations for resource allocation include not only the screening modalities such
as CBE, mammography, and diagnostic ultrasound,
but culturally-sensitive and linguistically-appropriate

216

Cancer

local programs to teach the value of early detection as
well as risk factors and breast health (Anderson 2013).
Evaluation goals are included for each resource level
for public education and awareness, as well as detection
methods. Recognizing that great differences in health
systems and infrastructure often exist within countries,
most notably from urban centers to rural areas, stratification is based on on-the-ground capacities, rather
than a single country-level determination, such as gross
domestic product per capita.
There is an important role for improved breast cancer
awareness among the general population in LMICs as well
as primary care practitioners; this can be an entry point to
any early detection program. In the absence of evidence
of the benefits from a systematic assessment of CBEbased organized screening, we will await the final results
from the Mumbai trial (Mittra and others 2010) and the
Trivandrum trial of CBE in India (Sankaranarayanan
and Bofetta 2010) for any definitive story on CBE as an
organized screening tool. Notwithstanding the absence
of definitive experimental evidence for implementing
organized CBE-based screening as a preferred approach
to screen for breast cancer, there is value in trying to
strengthen primary care skill in CBE to improve early
case-finding and diagnostic activity among symptomatic
women, since the large majority of breast cancers are
diagnosed in women with breast lumps.
Cervical Cancer
Cervical screening may have the greatest potential for
screening-detected reductions in cancer mortality in
less developed regions, where about 85 percent of all
new cases and 87 percent of deaths from cervical cancer
occur (Ferlay and others 2013). The incidence of cervical
cancer is highly correlated with country income group,
the prevalence of high-risk subtypes of the causal agent
HPV (particularly HPV 16 and 18, which account for
approximately 70 percent of the case burden), and
whether the country or region of interest has had
a longstanding population-based screening program
(see chapter 4 in this volume). In terms of DALYs, which
depend also on the average age at which individuals are
affected, cervical cancer ranks highest by, and is correlated with, a lower human development index, a composite measure that includes life expectancy, education,
and income (Soerjomataram and others 2012).
Despite the efficacy of cytology-based mass screening
programs, Papanicolaou, or Pap, testing is costly, complex, and requires robust health systems. Chapter 4 in
this volume notes the poor penetration of widespread
Pap testing owing to such costs. The unequal burden of
mortality as a consequence reflects unequal access in less

developed countries. Newer and less expensive strategies
to prevent cervical cancer have been evaluated and the
introduction of new HPV vaccines offers real prevention
prospects for the first time.
VIA in combination with cryotherapy (screenand-treat) was trialed in a demonstration project in
Ghana and was well accepted by the communities involved
(Blumenthal and others 2007). This effort underlines
the value of simple and effective technologies for lowresource settings despite inadequate coverage and significant numbers lost to follow-up. A one-time screening
at 35 years of age with VIA or HPV testing reduced the
lifetime risk of cervical cancer by approximately 25 to
36 percent and cost less than US$500 per year of life saved
(Goldie and others 2005).
Two exciting trials reporting on test-and-treat models
in India (Sankaranarayanan and others 2009) and South
Africa (Denny and others 2010) have highlighted the
superiority of a screen-and-treat approach that uses
relatively more expensive HPV testing over VIA, whether
followed by colposcopy in the Indian trial or cryotherapy
in the South African trial. The Indian trial showed that
a single round of HPV testing can reduce the incidence
of advanced cancers and deaths from cervical cancer.
The South African study showed benefits in the VIA
group, but HPV DNA testing most effectively reduced
the incidence of advanced invasive cancer that developed more than 12 months after cryotherapy. HPV
DNA testing, with or without VIA, shows the greatest
promise; however, given the current state of pathology
infrastructure and cost considerations for less developed
regions and, in particular, for rural populations in LICs
and lower-middle-income countries, the introduction
of mass screening with VIA may be the most prudent
real-world approach.
In addition, several combination modes of preventive
HPV vaccination in preadolescent girls, combined with
various screening measures in adult women, appear
promising as a comprehensive method to reduce the
burden of cervical cancer and reduce HPV infection. In
Sub-Saharan Africa in particular, a strong case exists for
screening with VIA and rapid HPV tests to ramp up prevention and detection services to screen, treat, or refer.
This approach would allow for the opportunity to deal
with any other gynecological issues. Populations with
coterminous HPV and HIV infections are at highest risk
and have the highest need for cervical cancer prevention
focus (Sahasrabuddhe and others 2012).
With respect to the cost effectiveness of cervical
screening programs, recent analyses demonstrate that
there are promising opportunities to prevent cervical
cancer in different world settings. As stated in chapter 4,
HPV vaccination for preadolescent girls and/or screening

of adult women, even only three times per lifetime, can
avert a significant proportion of cervical cancer cases
in a cost-effective manner. In addition to many other
critical inputs to health decisions, such as political will
and cultural acceptability, evidence on the cost effectiveness and affordability of HPV vaccination and screening
from rigorous model-based analyses can help to inform
decision makers and stakeholders in their deliberations
of how best to prevent cervical cancer worldwide.
Colorectal Cancer
Lambert, Sauvaget, and Sankaranarayanan (2009)
advance a strong argument that the burden of colorectal cancer, while high and growing in HIC regions
(about 12 percent of deaths from cancer), remains low
on the list of common cancers and primary causes of
cancer-related mortality in less developed regions (about
6 percent of deaths from cancer). Lambert, Sauvaget,
and Sankaranarayanan argue that the expense of mounting a mass screening effort in most LMICs is not currently justified, given the significant costs of colonoscopy
and follow-up services. The authors do allow that the
growth of more Western lifestyles in large urban centers
in upper-middle-income countries may represent areas
where colon screening may be more justifiable.
By contrast, as noted in chapter 16 of this volume,
at least one report suggests that screening colonoscopy
may be cost effective in Sub-Saharan Africa (Ginsberg
and others 2012), at least in the urban areas of
upper-middle-income countries, where the incidence
of colorectal cancer is increasing because of population
aging and the adoption of Western lifestyles.
The International Colorectal Cancer Screening
Network (2013), which works to document and standardize the best jurisdictional approaches to colorectal
screening, identifies the need for screening program
experience on every continent, although membership is
currently limited to more developed regions. Research
in progress may offer a range of promising and less
invasive methods to detect early-stage colon cancer,
which may offer better options to reduce colon cancer
mortality in LMICs.
A phased introduction of colorectal cancer screening by immune sensitive fecal occult blood testing in
Thailand, beginning with a pilot evaluation in Lampang
province, shows promise for reducing colon cancer
mortality. The program is based on a five-year interval
for immune fecal testing, which is supportable by the
health system infrastructure and appropriate, given the
relatively lower colon cancer rates compared with other
countries with screening programs (Khuhaprema and
others 2014).

Screening for Cancer: Considerations for Low- and Middle-Income Countries

217

Promising New Candidates
Simple visual screening methods in high-risk areas
for oral cancer in South Asia and Southeast Asia represent an excellent example of pragmatic screening
(Sankaranarayanan and others 2005). These cancers
are highly linked to tobacco and alcohol consumption,
as well as to chewing betel and areca nut and paan and
gutka (see chapter 5). Increasing evidence suggests that
HPV is a risk factor in oral, head, and neck cancers.
Most cost-effectiveness studies come from HICs, but
one very promising study from India suggests that oral
cancer screening by visual inspection has an incremental cost-effectiveness ratio of US$835 per life year
saved (Subramanian and others 2009). Further, the
authors note that the most prudent approach for limited resource settings should include only higher risk
populations, such as heavy users of tobacco and alcohol.
There is now some trial evidence that visual screening
can reduce oral cancer mortality in users of tobacco and
alcohol (Sankaranarayanan and others 2013).
By contrast, in HICs, a recent assessment from the
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force has concluded that
the case for mass screening for oral cancers in the relatively lower risk United States is insufficient to justify the
harms of mass screening of asymptomatic adults (Moyer
and U.S. Preventive Services Task Force 2014).
Gastric cancer is a close tie with liver cancer as the
second leading cancer-related cause of death and is a
particular challenge in the East Asia and Pacific region.
Promising programs are being mounted in Japan and
the Republic of Korea and in trials in China to screen
for the bacterium Helicobacter pylori, the cause of a large
fraction of gastric cancer, and to eradicate infections
detected. However, H. pylori eradication, which reduces
gastric cancer risk, is hampered by emerging regional
antimicrobial resistance to antibiotics used to treat it
and the lack of a means to target a high-risk population.
Gastric cancer remains a screening and prevention candidate in need of more refined trials (Park and others
2013).

218

The most promising evidence in LMICs suggests that
the highest priorities are breast and cervical cancer
screening, possibly followed by colorectal cancer or
stomach cancer screening, if programmatic infrastructure can be established in a stepwise fashion.
Carefully planned programs for breast screening,
according to local context and resource capacity as
highlighted in the Breast Health Global Initiative
documents, and VIA with cryosurgery or colposcopy
(with or without HPV testing, where available) can
appropriately be recommended as first cancer screening priorities in LMICs.

SPECIAL CONSIDERATIONS FOR CANCER
SCREENING IN LMICs

Role of Innovation
Many opportunities already exist to exploit the potential impact of programs for early detection and
screening. Considering a given screening strategy for
which locally-sourced evidence demonstrates at least
proof of concept in terms of efficacy and cost effectiveness, transition-to-scale projects can take advantage of a variety of innovative approaches to optimize
participation, follow-up for an abnormal screening,
as well as monitoring for treatment-related toxicities
and survivorship care. These approaches include
telemedicine; telepathology; institutional twinning;
task-shifting; and “m-Health” (WHO 2011a, 2011b),
models of care enhanced by the use of mobile phones,
which are widely available and affordable in most
LMICs (Ginsburg 2013). Large technical platforms
can give way to cloud applications, which allow for
easy and secure storage and compilation of information for screening programs. However, this still
requires a basic information and communications
technology infrastructure, computer availability, and
up-to-date software, which are missing in many
countries.
Similarly, not all screening activity needs to involve
only primary care physicians or specialty care providers,
if reliable evidence is used to build from project-to-scale
programs. In this fashion, trained community care
workers, nurses, and other care providers can assist in
building capacity, promoting screening activities, and
being effective screening agents in LMICs.

Screening Priorities in LMICs
Promising cancer screening candidates in each of the
less developed regions warrant attention. The joint
report of the World Economic Forum/Harvard School
of Public Health and the World Health Organization
highlights a set of affordable, feasible, and cost-effective
intervention strategies to reduce the economic impact
of noncommunicable diseases in LMICs (WEF 2011).

Diagonal Approach to Strengthen Health Systems
From a programmatic perspective, the breast and
cervical cancer studies also indicate some merit in an
integrated approach to screening under the umbrella of
maternal or reproductive health policy, as suggested in
the trial in Mumbai (Mittra and others 2010) and the
approach taken in Morocco.2 The Global Task Force on

Cancer

Expanded Access to Cancer Care and Control (2011)
has championed this diagonal approach, “the proactive,
supply-driven provision of a set of highly cost-effective
interventions on a large scale that bridges health clinics
and homes” (Sepúlveda 2006). While the age intervals
best chosen for a first screening intervention may not
be an exact match, for women undergoing simultaneous screening efforts, there is at least the prospect of
having both screening procedures performed during
the same visit, a predictor of better participation than
multiple visits, an observation now being mimicked
in HICs. “Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon” (UNAIDS 2011)
is an example of a program that added breast and
cervical cancer screening to an existing program for
another health condition, namely, HIV. HIV-positive
women have a greater chance of developing invasive
cervical cancer and higher mortality rates than their
HIV-negative counterparts. This type of program can
address the needs of a group at particularly high risk
with a low marginal cost.
Such a diagonal approach is not limited to women’s health services. Integrating cancer screening into
existing health programs can also help to build primary care capacity. Harnessing the synergies between
traditionally vertical programs can build platforms
onto which additional preventive and wellness care
(such as vaccinations, smoking cessation, and nutritional counseling) may be added to reduce the incidence and mortality from other cancers (such as
lung, stomach, or oral), as well as other high-burden
chronic noncommunicable diseases. Modeling such
programs can also help to convince policy makers that
cancer screening and cancer control in general will not
necessarily siphon off scarce resources from competing health priorities.
Policy Considerations for Cancer Screening in LMICs
Cancer screening policies and the programs they create
become part of established health care systems in governments and societies, each with its own norms and
standards. Although the evidence base may be global
for any particular cancer, policies and programs vary
considerably across the globe, not just between countries according to level of wealth, but among countries
of similar economic status. Some differences mirror the
huge variation in the incidence of different cancers, but
many are caused by differential weighting of evidence
and other factors.
Developing a screening policy for cancer involves
many decisions, including choice of diagnostic
technologies and follow-up interventions, the age
groups targeted, referral and enrollment strategies,

and quality assurance processes. The heterogeneity of
cancer screening policies across LMICs reflects differences in health care structures as well as the political
and cultural factors that shape policy. The governance
mechanisms for the development of screening policy may also vary. Some countries use a legislative
approach to mandate screening, thus opening policy
development to political influence. In other countries, policy development is delegated to technocrats
who rely on advice from expert committees or ad
hoc groups. Screening policy in LMICs often involves
several layers of organization, including transnational
actors (for example, the United Nations Population
Fund), national health ministries, and experts in various disciplines, as well as prominent domestic and
global advocacy groups. The respective roles of authorities is another source of variation, as is the degree of
reliance on or participation in the development of policy at the transnational level (for example, guidelines)
and how this is shaped by the institutional processes of
decision making (Flintcroft 2011).
Cancer screening policies sometimes run counter to
what would seem to reflect the best evidence (Nutley,
Walter, and Davies 2007). Knowing the diversity of
factors (political, social, and economic) that contribute
to the development of the health policies reinforces the
understanding that the way that research influences
policy is not linear and not necessarily determined
by the quality of the research alone (Humpreys and
Piot 2012; Nightingale and Scott 2007). In fact, many
accepted models of public health policy making for
cancer screening (research utilization) have likened
the process to a complex dance (Edwards 2001),
a garbage can of ideas waiting to be needed (Cohen,
March, and Olsen 1972), and parallel streams awaiting
a social, political, or economic reason to stimulate a
convergence and therefore the formation of policy
(Kingdon 2003). The policy process can become more
transparent and outcomes more predictable (although
still respecting national differences) with standardized
decision making systems that encompass the principles
of health technology assessment for all policy decisions
that involve weighing evidence on effectiveness, costs,
and societal factors.
Ultimately, the success of a cancer screening policy
and its associated program depends not only on the evidence base, but also on the willingness of the public to
take part in the screening process. This, in turn depends
to a great extent on how the benefits and risks of the
procedure are communicated (McCormack and others
2011) and how the program fits within the health care
system and with other health messages, including cancer
prevention.

Screening for Cancer: Considerations for Low- and Middle-Income Countries

219

ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors express special thanks to Signy Roland
for her support in the compilation and extraction of
the studies discussed in this chapter and to Sandra
Hofstetter for her support in compiling the manuscript.

NOTES
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income per capita
for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries: US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries:
• Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income: US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries: US$12,746 or more
1. http://www.who.int/cancer/detection/breastcancer/en
/index1.html.
2. “Importance of the Screening,” Fondation Lalla Salma
Prévention et Traitement des Cancers, accessed March 8,
2014, http://www.contrelecancer.ma/en/importance_du
_depistage.

REFERENCES
Anderson, B. 2013. “Context-Relevant Guidelines in Cancer
Care: Breast Cancer Early Detection, Diagnosis, and
Treatment in Low and Middle Income Countries.” In
Cancer Control 2013, edited by Ian McGrath, 36–40. http://
globalhealthdynamics.co.uk/cc2013/wp-content /uploads
/2013/04/36-40-Benjamin-O-Anderson_2013.pdf.
Blumenthal, P. D., L. Gaffikin, S. Deganus, R. Lewis, M. Emerson,
and others. 2007. “Cervical Cancer Prevention: Safety,
Acceptability, and Feasibility of a Single-Visit Approach in
Accra, Ghana.” American Journal of Obstetrics and Gynecology
196 (4): 407.e1–9.
Bray, F., A. Jemal, N. Grey, J. Ferlay, and F. Forman. 2012. “Global
Cancer Transitions According to the Human Development
Index (2008–2030): A Population-Based Study.” The Lancet
13: 790–801.
Carey, L. A., C. M. Perou, C. A. Livasy, L. G. Dressler, D. Cowan,
and others. 2006. “Race, Breast Cancer Subtypes, and
Survival in the Carolina Breast Cancer Study.” Journal of the
American Medical Association 295 (21): 2492–502.
Cohen, M. D., J. G. March, and J. P. Olsen. 1972. “A Garbage
Can Model of Organizational Choice.” Administrative
Science Quarterly 17: 1–25.
Corbex, M., R. Burton, and H. Sancho-Garnier. 2012. “Breast
Cancer Early Detection Methods for Low and Middle
Income Countries.” The Breast 21 (4): 428–34.
Denny, L., R. Herrero, C. Levin, and D. B. Thomas. 2015.
“Cervical Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities (third

220

Cancer

edition): Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Denny, L., L. Kuhn, C. C. Hu, W. Y. Tsai, and T. C. Wright Jr.
2010. “Human Papillomavirus-Based Cervical Cancer
Prevention: Long-Term Results of a Randomized Screening
Trial.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 102 (20): 1–11.
Edwards, M. 2001. Social Policy, Public Policy: From Problems
to Practice. St. Leonards, NSW: Allen & Unwin.
Errico, K. M., and D. Rowden. 2006. “Experiences of Breast
Cancer Survivor-Advocates and Advocates in Countries
with Limited Resources: A Shared Journey in Breast Cancer
Advocacy.” The Breast Journal 12 (Suppl. 1): 111–16.
Esserman, L., I. Thompson Jr., and B. Reid. 2013. “Overdiagnosis
and Overtreatment in Cancer: An Opportunity for
Improvement.” Journal of the American Medical Association
310 (8): 797–98. doi:10.1001/jama.2013.108415.
Family Practice Notebook. 2011. Length Bias. http://www
.fpnotebook.com/Prevent/Epi/LngthBs.htm.
Ferlay J, Soerjomataram I, Ervik M, Dikshit R, Eser S, Mathers C,
Rebelo M, Parkin DM, Forman D, Bray, F. GLOBOCAN 2012
v1.0, Cancer Incidence and Mortality Worldwide: IARC
CancerBase No. 11 [Internet]. Lyon, France: International
Agency for Research on Cancer; 2013. Available from: http://
globocan.iarc.fr, accessed on 23/11/2014.
Flintcroft, T. 2011. “Getting Evidence into Policy: The Need
for Deliberative Strategies?” Social Science & Medicine
72: 1039–46.
Ginsberg, G. M., J. A. Lauer, S. Zelle, S. Baeten, and R. Baltussen.
2012. “Cost Effectiveness of Strategies to Combat Breast,
Cervical, and Colorectal Cancer in Sub-Saharan Africa and
South East Asia: Mathematical Modeling Study.” British
Medical Journal 344: e614.
Ginsburg, O. M. 2013. “Breast and Cervical Cancer Control
in Low and Middle-Income Countries: Human Rights
Meet Sound Health Policy.” Journal of Cancer Policy 1 (3):
e35–e41.
Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care and
Control in Developing Countries. 2011. Closing the Divide:
A Blueprint to Expand Access in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries. Boston, MA: Harvard Global Equity Initiative.
http://ghsm.hms.harvard.edu/files/assets/Programs
/NewbornHealth/files/ccd_report_bw.pdf.
Goel, V. 2001. “Appraising Organized Screen Programmes for
Testing for Genetic Susceptibility to Cancer.” British Medical
Journal 322 (7295): 1174–78.
Goldie, S., G. Gaffikin, J. Goldhaber-Fiebert, A. Gordillo-Tobar,
C. Levin, and others. 2005. “Cost-Effectiveness of CervicalCancer Screening in Five Developing Countries.” New
England Journal of Medicine 353: 2158–68.
Hackshaw, A. K., and E. A. Paul. 2003. “Breast Self-Examination
and Death from Breast Cancer: A Meta-Analysis.” British
Journal of Cancer 88: 1047–53.
Harris, R., G. F. Sawaya, V. A. Moyer, and N. Calonge. 2011.
“Reconsidering the Criteria for Evaluating Proposed
Screening Programs: Reflections from 4 Current and
Former Members of the U.S. Preventive Services Task

Force.” Epidemiologic Reviews 33 (1): 20–35. doi:10.1093
/epirev/mxr005.
Humpreys, K., and P. Piot. 2012. “Scientific Evidence Alone
Is Not Sufficient Basis for Health Policy.” British Medical
Journal 344: e1316.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2005. IARC
Handbooks of Cancer Prevention: Cervix Cancer Screening.
Lyon, France: IARC. http://www.iarc.fr/en/publications
/pdfs-online/prev/handbook10/HANDBOOK10.pdf.
International Colorectal Cancer Screening Network.
2013. “ICRCSN Publications.” http://icrcsn.ceu.ox.ac.uk
/publications.
Kalager, M., H. Adami, and M. Bretthauer. 2014. “Too Much
Mammography.” British Medical Journal 348: g1403.
doi:http://dx.doi.org/10.1136/bmj.g1403.
Khuhaprema, T., S. Sangrajrang, S. Lalitwongsa,
V. Chokvanitphong, T. Raunroadroong, and others. 2014.
“Organised Colorectal Cancer Screening in Lampang
Province, Thailand: Preliminary Results from a Pilot
Implementation Programme.” British Medical Journal 4:
e003671. doi:10.1136/bmjopen-2013-003671.
Kingdon, J. 2003. Agendas, Alternatives and Public Policies. 2nd
ed. New York: Longman.
Knaul, F., J. Frenk, and L. Shulman. 2011. Closing the
Cancer Divide: A Blueprint to Expand Access in Low and
Middle Income Countries. Boston, MA: Harvard Global
Equity Initiative. http://gtfccc.harvard.edu/icb/icb.do
?keyword=k69586&pageid=icb.page334798.
Lambert, R., C. Sauvaget, and R. Sankaranarayanan. 2009.
“Mass Screening for Colorectal Cancer Is Not Justified
in Most Developing Countries.” International Journal of
Cancer 125 (2): 253–56.
McCormack, L. A., K. Treiman, D. Rupert, P. Williams-Piehota,
E. Nadler, and others. 2011. “Measuring Patient-Centered
Communication in Cancer Care: A Literature Review and
the Development of a Systematic Approach.” Social Science
& Medicine 72 (7): 1085–95.
Mittra, I., G. A. Mishra, S. Singh, S. Aranke, P. Notani, and
others. 2010. “A Cluster Randomized, Controlled Trial of
Breast and Cervix Cancer Screening in Mumbai, India:
Methodology and Interim Results after Three Rounds of
Screening.” International Journal of Cancer 126 (4): 976–84.
doi:10.1002/ijc.24840.
Morrison, A. S. 1992. Screening in Chronic Disease. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Moyer, V. A., on behalf of the U.S. Preventive Services Task
Force. 2014. “Screening for Oral Cancer: U.S. Preventive
Services Task Force Recommendation Statement.”
Annals of Internal Medicine 160 (1): 55–60. doi:10.7326/
M13-2568.
Nguyen, L. H., W. Laohasiriwong, J. F. Stewart, P. Wright, Y. T. B.
Nguyen, and P. C. Coyte. 2013. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
of a Screening Program for Breast Cancer in Vietnam.”
Value in Health Regional Issues 2 (1): 21–28.
Nightingale, P., and A. Scott. 2007. “Peer Review and the
Relevance Gap: Ten Suggestions for Policymakers.” Science
and Public Policy 34: 543–553.

Nutley, S. M., I. Walter, and H. T. O. Davies. 2007. Using
Evidence: How Research Can Inform Public Services. Bristol,
UK: The Policy Press.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2011. Screening, Survival and Mortality
for Breast Cancer. http://www.oecd-ilibrary.org/docserver
/download/8111101ec048.pdf?expires=1394159448&id=id
&accname=guest&checksum=2FC8D19B124E6033BD7AF114C1A8E2CB.
Park, J. Y., D. Forman, E. R. Greenberg, and R. Herrero. 2013.
“Helicobacter Pylori Eradication in the Prevention of
Gastric Cancer: Are More Trials Needed?” Current Oncology
Reports 15 (6): 517–25.
Pisani, P., D. M. Parkin, C. Ngelangel, D. Esteban, L. Gibson,
and others. 2006. “Outcome of Screening by Clinical
Examination of the Breast in a Trial in the Philippines.”
International Journal of Cancer 118 (1): 149–54.
Porter, P. 2008. “‘Westernizing’ Women’s Risks? Breast Cancer
in Lower-Income Countries.” New England Journal of
Medicine 358: 213–16. doi:10.1056/NEJMp0708307.
Price, A. J., P. Ndom, E. Atenguena, J. P. Mambou Nouemssi,
and R. W. Ryder. 2012. “Cancer Care Challenges in
Developing Countries.” Cancer 118 (14): 3627–35.
doi:10.1002/cncr.26681.
Raffle, A., and M. Gray. 2007. Screening: Evidence and Practice.
Oxford, UK: Oxford University Press.
Sahasrabuddhe, V. V., G. P. Parham, M. H. Mwanahamuntu,
and S. H. Vermund. 2012. “Cervical Cancer Prevention in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries: Feasible, Affordable,
Essential.” Cancer Prevention and Research 5 (1): 11–17.
Sankaranarayanan, R., and P. Bofetta. 2010. “Research on
Cancer Prevention, Detection and Management in Low
and Middle Income Countries.” Annals of Oncology
21: 1935–43.
Sankaranarayanan, R., B. M. Nene, S. S. Shastri, K. Jayant,
R. Muwonge, and others. 2009. “HPV Screening for Cervical
Cancer in Rural India.” New England Journal of Medicine
360: 1385–94.
Sankaranarayanan, R., K. Ramadas, S. Thara, R. Muwonge,
G. Thomas, and others. 2013. “Long Term Effect of Visual
Screening on Oral Cancer Incidence and Mortality in a
Randomized Trial in Kerala, India.” Oral Oncology 49 (4):
314–21.
Sankaranarayanan, R., K. Ramadas, G. Thomas, R. Muwonge,
S. Thara, and others. 2005. “Effect of Screening on Oral
Cancer Mortality in Kerala, India: A Cluster-Randomised
Controlled Trial.” The Lancet 365 (9475): 1927–33.
Schnipper, L. E., G. H. Lyman, D. W. Blayney, J. R. Hoverman,
D. Raghavan, and others. 2013. “American Society of
Clinical Oncology 2013 Top Five List in Oncology.” Journal
of Clinical Oncology 31 (34): 4362–70.
Sepúlveda, J. 2006. “Foreword.” In Disease Control Priorities
in Developing Countries, 2nd ed., edited by D. T. Jamison,
J. G. Breman, A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson,
D. B. Evans, P. Jha, A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, xii–xv.
Washington, DC: World Bank and Oxford University
Press.

Screening for Cancer: Considerations for Low- and Middle-Income Countries

221

Soerjomataram, I., J. Lortet-Tieulent, D. M. Parkin,
J. Ferlay, C. Mathers, and others. 2012. “Global Burden
of Cancer in 2008: A Systematic Analysis of DisabilityAdjusted Life Years in 12 World Regions.” The Lancet
380 (9856): 125.
Story, H. L., R. R. Love, R. R. Salim, A. J. Roberto,
J. L. Krieger, and others. 2012. “Improving Outcomes
from Breast Cancer in a Low-Income Country: Lessons
from Bangladesh.” International Journal of Breast Cancer.
doi:10.1155/2012/423562.
Subramanian, S., R. Sankaranarayanan, B. Bapat, T. Somanathan,
G. Thomas, and others. 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness of Oral
Cancer Screening: Results from a Cluster Randomized
Controlled Trial in India.” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 87 (3): 200–06.
Thomas, D. B., D. L. Gao, R. M. Ray, W. W. Wang, C. J. Allison,
and others. 2002. “Randomized Trial of Breast SelfExamination in Shanghai: Final Results.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 94 (19): 1445–57.
UNAIDS (Joint United Nations Programme on
HIV/AIDS). 2011. The George W. Bush Institute,
the U.S. Department of State, Susan G. Komen for
the Cure®, and UNAIDS Announce New Women’s
Health Initiative. http://www.unaids.org /en /resources
/presscentre / pressreleaseandstatementarchive /2011
/september/20110913pinkribbonredribbon/.
Van de Vijver, M. J., Y. D. He, L. J. van’t Veer, H. Dai,
A. A. M. Hart, and others. 2002. “A Gene-Expression
Signature as a Predictor of Survival in Breast Cancer.” New
England Journal of Medicine 347: 1999–2009.
Vetto, J. T., J. K. Petty, N. Dunn, N. C. Prouser, and D. F. Austin.
2002. “Structured Clinical Breast Examination (CBE)

222

Cancer

Training Results in Objective Improvement in CBE Skills.”
Journal of Cancer Education 17 (3): 124–27.
Vorobiof, D. A., F. Sitas, and G. Vorobiof. 2001. “Breast Cancer
Incidence in South Africa.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 19
(Suppl. 18): 125–27.
WEF (World Economic Forum). 2011. From Burden to Best
Buys: Reducing the Economic Impact of Non-Communicable
Disease in Low and Middle-Income Countries. Geneva,
Switzerland: WEF. http://www.who.int/nmh/publications
/best_buys_summary.pdf.
Welch, G., L. Schwartz, and S. Woloshin. 2011. Overdiagnosed:
Making People Sick in the Pursuit of Health. Boston, MA:
Beacon Press.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2011a. mHealth: New
Horizons for Health through Mobile Technologies: Based on
the Findings of the Second Global Survey on eHealth (Global
Observatory for eHealth Series, Volume 3). http://whqlibdoc
.who.int/publications/2011/9789241564250_eng.pdf.
———. 2011b. E-health in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries: Findings from the Center for Health Market
Innovations. http://www.who.int/bulletin/volumes/90/5
/11-099820/en/.
Wilson, J. M. G., and G. Junger. 1968. “Principles and Practice
of Screening for Disease.” Public Health Papers 34, WHO,
Geneva.
Yaffe, M. J., and K. I. Pritchard. 2014. “Overdiagnosing
Overdiagnosis.” The Oncologist 19: 103–06. doi:10.1634
/theoncologist.2014-0036.
Zelle, S., and R. Baltussen. 2013. “Economic Analyses of
Breast Cancer Control in Low- and Middle-Income
Countries: A Systematic Review.” Systematic Reviews 2: 20.
doi:10.1186/2046-4053-2-20.

Chapter

13

Surgical Services for Cancer Care
Anna J. Dare, Benjamin O. Anderson, Richard Sullivan,
C. S. Pramesh, Cheng-Har Yip, Andre Ilbawi, Isaac F. Adewole,
Rajendra A. Badwe, and Cindy L. Gauvreau

INTRODUCTION
Surgery is a fundamental modality for curative and
palliative treatment of most cancers in countries across
all income settings. In high-income countries (HICs),
where the most common solid organ malignant cancers,
such as breast and colon cancers, are more likely to be
successfully diagnosed at early stages, surgical resection provides definitive locoregional control of the
primary tumor. This approach has significant curative
potential when combined with appropriately selected
adjuvant systemic treatment and radiotherapy. In lowand middle-income countries (LMICs), where locally
advanced or metastatic cancer is a common initial disease presentation, surgical resection or debulking may be
one of the few available modalities to achieve reasonable
palliative disease control.
Surgery has not received sufficient attention in the
cancer control discussion in LMICs (Goss and others 2014; Purushotham, Lewison, and Sullivan 2012).
With many competing health priorities and significant
financial constraints, surgical services in these settings
are given low priority within national health plans and
are allocated few resources from domestic accounts or
international development assistance programs (Bae,
Groen, and Kushner 2011; Farmer and Kim 2008). As a
result, in most low-income countries (LICs), and many
middle-income countries (MICs), access to safe, optimal
surgical services for cancer is poor, and large proportions

of the population are unable to access even the most
basic surgical care (Funk and others 2010).
The projected increase in the cancer burden in LMICs
over the next 20 years (see chapter 2 in this volume)
necessitates that all countries give consideration to the
establishment of surgical services with adequate capacity
to meet current and future needs. In general, significant
capital investment in surgical infrastructure, equipment,
and personnel is needed in LICs, especially those in
Sub-Saharan Africa (LeBrun and others 2014). In MICs,
improved coordination, regulation, financial risk protection, and strategic planning for cancer and surgical
services are requisites to improve service delivery and
outcomes (Goss and others 2014). Surgical capacity
building takes time, particularly with respect to developing the surgical workforce. Efforts to strengthen surgical
services in LMICs should be strategically proactive to
facilitate the provision of safe, effective, and accessible
surgical cancer care for current and future patients.
This chapter discusses the public sector delivery of
surgical cancer services in resource-constrained environments. We describe the current status of surgical services
for cancer care in LMICs, analyze the barriers to care, and
outline the surgical delivery platforms available to countries at different resource and income levels. Key considerations for policy makers relating to quality, safety, access,
coverage, and economic and planning considerations in
the scale-up of surgical cancer services are highlighted.

Corresponding author: Anna J. Dare, MBChB, PhD, St. Michael’s Hospital and University of Toronto, Canada, DareA@smh.ca

223

BURDEN OF SURGICALLY TREATABLE
CANCERS IN LMICs
As many LMICs transition to higher levels of social and
economic development, with attendant greater population growth and improved longevity, the cancer burden
amenable to surgical treatment is projected to increase
dramatically (figure 13.1). Almost all of the common
cancers require surgical services for histological diagnosis if radiology-guided biopsy is not available, for resection as the mainstay of curative treatment, and selectively
for palliation.
Surgery is more effective, less complex, and less costly
when performed for early-stage or locally advanced
cancer. Curative treatment can often be delivered within
a single clinical encounter and is achievable even in
low-resource settings. Although surgery has less of a role
in advanced stage cancer, in select cases it can provide
improved quality and prolongation of life, for example,

for malignant bowel obstruction and fungating breast
cancers. To realize the therapeutic benefit of surgical
care in achieving cancer cure, stage-shifting is required
to address the disease burden before it becomes locally
advanced or metastatic—an objective particularly valid
in LMICs, where more than 70 percent of patients present with advanced cancer (Adebamowo and Ajayi 2000;
Anyanwu 2000, 2008).

STATUS OF SURGICAL CANCER SERVICES
IN LMICs
The availability of, access to, and quality of surgical
cancer care varies widely, leading to equally wide variations in outcomes among and within countries. Most
LICs face profound shortages of surgeons, anesthesiologists, and pathologists; inadequate equipment and
supplies; absent or severely dilapidated general and

Figure 13.1 Estimated Number of New Cancer Cases by Country-Income Group in LMICs for Four Common Surgically Treatable Cancers,
2010 and 2030
b. Cervical cancer
400,000

600,000

300,000

350,000
Incident cases

Incident cases

a. Breast cancer
800,000
700,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000

250,000
200,000
150,000
100,000
50,000

0

0
Lowincome

Lower-middle- Upper-middleincome
income

Highincome

Lowincome

Incident cases

Incident cases

Lower-middle- Upper-middleincome
income

Highincome

d. Oral cancer

c. Colorectal cancer
1,000,000
900,000
800,000
700,000
600,000
500,000
400,000
300,000
200,000
100,000
0

Lowincome

Lower-middle- Upper-middleincome
income

200,000
180,000
160,000
140,000
120,000
100,000
80,000
60,000
40,000
20,000
0
Lowincome

Highincome
2010

Lower-middle- Upper-middleincome
income

Highincome

2030

Source: Ferlay, Soerjomataram, and others 2013.
Note: All cases of breast, cervical, colorectal, and oral cancer require the input of a surgeon or gynecologist for diagnosis and clinical management. LMICs = low- and middle-income countries.

224

Cancer

surgical infrastructure; and a lack of financing and strategic health services planning. The result is that a large
proportion of the population is without access to even
the most basic surgical services (Funk and others 2010;
Weiser and others 2008). In most MICs, surgical services
for cancer are more widely available, especially in major
cities, but variations in quality, inequitable coverage and
utilization, and poor central regulation and coordination (Pramesh and others 2014; Yip and others 2011)
hamper the effective provision of care.
Access, Distribution, and Utilization
Access
Cancer surgery typically requires more complex infrastructure, training, support services, and referral networks than many basic surgical procedures. Gross
inequities between HICs and LMICs exist in access to
surgical services (Funk and others 2010; Weiser and
others 2008) (table 13.1). An estimated two billion people lack access to any form of surgical care, including
surgery for cancer (Funk and others 2010). Regional
and national estimates of surgical services for cancer
are not available, but access and coverage are likely to be
significantly worse than for surgical services in general.
Globally, approximately seven million to eight million
patients require a major cancer operation each year, and
at least three million additional patients require biopsies
each year (Ferlay, Steliarova-Foucher, and others 2013).
Distribution
The distribution of surgical services within countries is also uneven in LMICs, compounding issues
of access and coverage (Goss and others 2014). The
surgical workforce and surgical facilities tend to cluster in urban areas (Ozgediz and others 2008). Surgical
services for cancer, if present, typically are located at
third-level facilities, often in the capital city, with poor
or nonexistent referral networks. In settings in which a
large proportion of the population lives in rural areas,
accessing appropriate surgical cancer care can be an
insurmountable challenge.
Utilization
Transportation costs and the time required to access
diagnostic and treatment facilities may act as deterrents
to receiving timely care. Even traveling relatively short
distances can be a significant barrier in countries with
poor transport infrastructure or challenging terrain. In
a study of South African women presenting with breast
cancer, the risk of presenting with an advanced stage cancer was 1.25 times higher for every 30 kilometers traveled
to the diagnostic facility (Dickens and others 2014). In a

situational analysis of health facilities in 24 LICs and
27 MICs, the average patient had to travel 100 kilometers
to reach a facility that could perform a basic biopsy
diagnostic procedure (Ilbawi, Cherian, Mikkelson,
Sankaranarayanan, and Sullivan, unpublished data).
Even where surgical cancer services are available and
accessible, prohibitive user costs and perceptions that
cancer cannot be successfully treated may prevent people
from obtaining timely treatment (Ilbawi, Einterz, and
Nkusu 2013).
Sociocultural belief systems and practices can affect
cancer awareness and the uptake of surgical cancer
services in LMICs (Goss and others 2014). Barriers to
timely uptake of services include fear of surgery and hospital services in general, “cancer fatalism,” cultural beliefs
and social stigma related to being cut or having a body
part removed, poor community experiences relating to
outcomes, and costs (Daher 2012; Goss and others 2014;
Yip and Anderson 2007).
Quality, Safety, and Outcomes
Wide variations exist globally in the quality and safety
of surgical care (see Debas and others 2015, chapter 16).
Quality issues are particularly concerning in the context
of surgical treatment for cancer, where achieving adequate
resection is fundamental to the success of the procedure.
Infrastructure and Training
In LMICs, quality and safety issues are often closely
linked to basic resource deficits relating to infrastructure,
Table 13.1 Disparities in Surgical Capacity between High-Income
and Low-Income Countries
Measure

High-income countries

Low-income countries

Number of surgeons
(Hoyler and others 2014)

34–97 per 100,000a

0.13–1.57 per 100,000

Number of
anesthesiologists (Hoyler
and others 2014)

34–97 per 100,000a

0–4.9 per 100,000

Number of operating
rooms (Funk and others
2010)

> 14 per 100,000

< 2 per 100,000

Volume of operationsb
(Weiser and others 2008)

172.3 million procedures
per year (73.6 percent
of global total, for
30.2 percent of the
global population)

8.1 million procedures
per year (3.5 percent
of global total, for
34.8 percent of the
global population)

a. High-income country data refer to “surgical providers” and include surgeons and anesthesiologists
within the same estimate.
b. Data refer to high-health-expenditure countries and low-health-expenditure countries, which are
correlated with income status.

Surgical Services for Cancer Care

225

equipment, supplies, and sterility, as well as a lack of
appropriately trained providers. Poor outcomes reinforce community perceptions that cancer cannot be
successfully treated with surgery. Although lumpectomy
and modified radical mastectomy for breast cancer are
not technically complex procedures, inadequate surgical
resection of tumors can significantly undermine the
effectiveness of these procedures. Incomplete or inadequate breast cancer resection following lumpectomy
or mastectomy has been reported at rates as high as
15–45 percent in India and Nigeria (Agarwal and others
2009; Thorat and others 2008; Ukwenya and others
2008); almost 50 percent of patients who underwent
incomplete surgery in nonspecialist centers in India had
surgically excisable disease left behind (Thorat and others
2008). Postgraduate training, which covers modern surgical oncology practices and continuing medical education,
is lacking in many LMICs. This deficit impacts not only
proper surgical oncology technique but also appropriate
decision-making, including whether surgery is indicated.
Standardization of Guidelines
The standardization of surgical care with guidelines,
standards, and checklists can ensure a minimum level
of quality and safety and reduce avoidable surgical
morbidity and mortality (Haynes and others 2009),
even in resource-constrained settings (see Debas and
others 2015, chapter 16). Current use of guidelines and
standards for surgical care in LMICs varies among countries and facilities. A recent study of health facilities in
24 LICs and 27 MICs reported that only 22 percent of
facilities (n = 294/1,269) had established clinical management guidelines for surgical care and pain relief (Ilbawi,
Cherian, Mikkelson, Sankaranarayanan, and Sullivan,
unpublished data). Most clinical guidelines have been
developed in and for HICs and are not necessarily
applicable in resource-poor settings. However, for the
past decade, Tata Memorial Centre, a national comprehensive cancer center in Mumbai, India, has published its
own clinical guidelines and algorithms for all aspects of
cancer care, including surgical and perioperative care. The
guidelines are developed and updated through annual
evidence-based management meetings, using international evidence and taking into account local resources
and challenges. Tata’s guidelines (freely available for
reference on their institutional website, https://tmc.gov
.in/clinicalguidelines/clinical.htm) are now used in other
LMICs, including Bangladesh, Kenya, and Nigeria. There
is also an initiative to categorize some of these guidelines
as “minimum,” “optimal,” and “optional,” with health
care delivery platforms treating patients based on the
platforms’ individual infrastructural and trained human
resource capabilities.

226

Cancer

Partners in the Provision of Surgical Services
The safe provision of anesthesia is another often overlooked requirement of effective surgical cancer care.
Profound differences exist in anesthetic mortality rates
between low and high Human Development Index
countries (Bainbridge and others 2012); anesthetic mortality rates are reported to be as high as one in 500 in
several LMICs in Sub-Saharan Africa (Glenshaw and
Madzimbamuto 2005; Hansen, Gausi, and Merikebu
2000; Maman and others 2005; Walker and Wilson 2008;
see Debas and others 2015, chapter 15.)
Cancer surgery is also highly dependent on two other
major areas of clinical care: pathology and imaging.
Quality pathology services are central to making an
accurate diagnosis and planning appropriate surgical
care. Imaging is required for accurately staging early,
curable cancers; for planning more complex operative
resections; and, in some cases, for establishing the presence of metastatic disease. The role of these services in
the delivery of quality comprehensive cancer is discussed
further in chapter 11 in this volume.

DEVELOPING SURGICAL CANCER SERVICES
AND DELIVERY PLATFORMS IN LMICs
Resource-Stratified Approaches
Resource-stratified approaches to screening, diagnosis,
and treatment interventions for specific cancers, which
can help countries assess the level at which they can
provide effective cancer services, have been presented in
previous chapters. However, policy makers developing
cancer control strategies need to consider not only what
services are required, but also the platforms through
which these services can be most effectively delivered to
those who need them.
In this section, we outline potential delivery platforms
for surgical cancer services in resource-poor settings,
using a level-of-care approach (box 13.1). We consider how surgical cancer services—diagnostic, curative,
palliative, and adjuvant services—may be effectively
delivered across different surgical platforms (community health center, first-level hospital, or third-level
hospital), using breast, cervical, oral, and bowel cancers
as examples. Where relevant, we consider the most
appropriate surgical platform for service delivery for
countries at different income levels and according to
the resource-stratified interventions presented in earlier
chapters.1 Finally, we discuss how quality and efficiency
demands can be balanced with access and coverage challenges in LMICs through the appropriate deployment of
surgical cancer platforms, and the referral networks and
service partnerships between them. Many countries are

Box 13.1

Situational Analysis of Surgical Cancer Services: Key Questions
Key Questions for Policy Makers and Planners
• What is the burden of surgically treatable cancers
in the country?
• Current
• Projected
• What stage of presentation is typical for each cancer (percent early, locally advanced, disseminated)?
• What surgical platforms are currently available
within the country? Where are they located?
• Do any of these platforms currently provide
surgical cancer care:
• As part of a general surgical service?
• As part of a dedicated cancer service?
• How well-resourced are these platforms?
• Human resources, infrastructure, equipment,
supporting services
• What adjuvant therapies are available and affordable for the country’s resource level?
• Where are these adjuvant therapies currently
delivered, if anywhere?
• Who delivers them?

only beginning to consider these issues; very little analysis or published country experience in LMICs is available
to serve as an evidence base.
Guidelines for Surgical Platforms
Delivery platforms refer to the structural and organizational modes or channels of delivery for public health
and clinical services. Platforms for delivery of surgical
care can be defined across four levels:
•
•
•
•

Community health center
First-level hospital/district hospital
Second-level hospital/regional hospital
Third-level hospital/tertiary hospital

The basic resources required for each level are summarized in table 13.2. In practice, significant variations
and overlap occur among levels of care.
Delivery platforms for surgical cancer services coexist with other platforms delivering general cancer and
surgical services, inpatient services, and primary care.
They are often co-located and operate synergistically

• Are radiotherapy services available? Where?
• Where are they available in relation to surgical
and adjuvant treatment?
• Are palliative medicines, such as opioids, reliably
available? Where?
• What referral networks exist? What are the
barriers to referring patients between facilities?
• What are the barriers to receiving timely and
appropriate surgical and cancer treatment?
• Financial, geographic, sociocultural
• Human resources, infrastructure, equipment
and supplies
• Is it feasible to provide screening and early case
detection, given the country’s resource level and
priorities?
• Are there plans to do this in the medium-tolong term?
• How will this affect surgical need?

to support the effective delivery of clusters of health
services.
Diagnostic, Curative, and Palliative Services
Diagnosis Surgical services play a key role in cancer
diagnosis. Biopsy, which is required for the definitive
diagnosis of cancer, involves taking a sample of suspicious tissue by using either a needle or an open surgical
technique and then examining the removed cells under
a microscope. The tissue sampling aspects of the biopsy
procedure can be provided in most LMICs within a
first-level hospital platform, as well as higher platforms,
if the surgical providers are trained in the technique used
and adequate means for sample fixation exist. Providing
biopsy services at a first-level platform reduces delays
between initial presentation and definitive diagnosis and
improves access and coverage. Because lymphadenopathy has many non-neoplastic causes in LMICs (Kingham
and others 2013), referral to a higher specialist service
for the purposes of tissue sampling only is premature,
increases losses to follow-up, delays diagnosis, and risks
overwhelming limited specialist services with nonspecific referrals.

Surgical Services for Cancer Care

227

Table 13.2 Platforms for Delivering Surgical Cancer Care
Community health center

District/first-level hospital

Regional/second-level hospital

Tertiary/third-level hospital

• Community health center
or small rural hospital

• District– or provincial-level
hospital, with 50–300 beds

• Referral hospital of 200–800
beds

• Referral hospital of 300–1,500
beds

• May have a small number
of inpatient and maternity
beds

• Adequately equipped major
and minor operating theaters

• Well-equipped major and minor
operating theaters

• Well-equipped major and
minor operating theaters

• Trained nonphysician or
medical officer anesthetists

• Supported by imaging,
laboratory, and blood bank
services, as well as basic
intensive care facilities

• Advanced imaging, laboratory
services

• Capable of performing
minor surgical procedures
under local anesthesia
• Paramedical staff, nurses,
midwives
• Visiting doctors

• District medical officers
in surgery, senior clinical
(nonphysician) officers in
surgery, nurses, midwives

• Adequately equipped major and
minor operating theaters

• +/− resident general
surgeon and/or
obstetrician-gynecologist

• General surgeons,
obstetrician-gynecologists

• Visiting specialists

• +/− specialist surgeons

• Anesthesiologists

• Intensive care facilities
• Highly specialized staff and
technical equipment
• Clinical services highly
differentiated by function
• Often have teaching activities

Source: Adapted from WHO 2003 and Debas and others 2015, chapter 12.

Tissue sampling itself is not technically complex.
Accurate and timely reporting of the biopsy sample by
a trained pathologist is the main challenge in obtaining
a diagnosis. In LICs, specimens may be taken at the
first-level hospital level but processed and reported at a
higher center, often within a third-level or national platform, because of the lack of trained histopathology technicians and pathologists. This approach can maximize
available resources and also promote standardized, quality reporting. However, it requires coordination between
the tissue sampling center, where the biopsy sample is
taken, and the pathology center, where the biopsy is read
and reported, to ensure timely feedback of the diagnosis.
In MICs, histopathology services may be more
widely available, and basic pathology services may
be provided within a first-level hospital platform.
Centralized approaches to reading and reporting cancer
biopsies are still important, however. These approaches
can promote the efficient use of resources; increase
the range of diagnostic tests able to be performed; and
ensure standardized, quality reporting. For this reason,
the use of second- or third-level platforms for biopsy
reporting is encouraged.
Treatment with Curative Intent In LICs, surgical services for cancer are usually provided through second- or
third-level platforms. Severe shortages of surgical infrastructure, equipment, surgeons, anesthesiologists, and
supporting services preclude providing these services
within a first-level platform. Cancer surgery is typically
performed by generalist surgeons, as specialist cancer
surgeons are not available.

228

Cancer

In LICs with basic surgical resources at first-level
facilities, a minimum package of surgical services for
cancer can be delivered within this platform. This package includes biopsy, surgical treatment for precancerous
cervical lesions and early-stage invasive cervical cancer,
breast cancer surgery, and resection of small oral tumors
(table 13.3). Provided there is a surgical provider familiar with cancer resection requirements, these procedures
require little additional infrastructure, equipment, or
supplies, compared with other major general surgical
operations routinely performed at first-level facilities.
Treatment of some precancerous lesions can be safely
undertaken within a community or first-level platform,
even where full general surgical services are not available.
Rwanda has recently published its experience scaling
up cervical screening and treatment services across the
country using first-level or community-level facilities to
screen, diagnose, and treat, often within a single clinical
encounter (Binagwaho and others 2013).
In MICs, surgical services for early-stage breast, cervical, colon, and oral cancer can often be delivered within
a first-level platform because of the greater availability of
basic surgical resources, including surgeons. This delivery
can improve access and may reduce the direct nonmedical
costs associated with seeking surgical cancer care in many
MICs. Appropriate training and continuing education of
surgical providers at the first level is crucial, however, to
reduce the risk of inadequate or incomplete resection.
Advanced breast, cervical, oral, and colorectal cancers
require advanced surgical platforms in LMICs, typically a dedicated regional or national center providing
cancer care. Advanced cancers are technically more

Table 13.3 Delivery Platforms for Priority Surgical Cancer Interventions in LICs and MICs
Community health
center

District (first-level)
hospital

Regional (second-level)
hospital

Tertiary (third-level) hospital

Diagnosis

Refer to higher center

Biopsy (send pathology to
higher center)

Biopsy ± onsite pathology,
imaging (XR, liver US), lab (CBC,
LFT)

Biopsy + onsite pathology,
imaging (XR, liver US), lab (CBC,
LFT)

Curative surgical treatment

″

Referral to a higher center

MRM ± oophorectomy

MRM ± oophorectomy

Palliative surgical treatment

″

Referral to a higher center

Total mastectomy

Total mastectomy

Adjuvant therapy

″

Hormone therapy

Hormone therapy, chemotherapy

Hormone therapy, chemo, RTa

Diagnosis

Refer to higher center

FNA/US-guided FNAB,
imaging (XR, liver US), lab
(CBC, LFT)

FNA/US-guided FNAB + onsite
pathology, imaging (XR, liver US),
lab (CBC, LFT) BCS & SLNB (dye
or radioa,b)

FNA/US-guided FNAB + onsite
pathology, imaging (XR, liver US),
lab (CBC, LFT) BCS & SLNB (dye
or radioa,b)

Curative surgical treatment

″

MRM ± oophorectomy

MRM ± oophorectomy

MRM ± oophorectomy

Palliative surgical treatment

″

Total mastectomy

Total mastectomy

Adjuvant therapy

″

Hormone therapy, 1st-line
chemob

Hormone therapy, chemo, RT

Hormone therapy, chemo, RTa

HPV test, VIA

HPV test, VIA

HPV test, VIA ± colposcopy,
biopsy

HPV test, VIA ± colposcopy,
biopsy

Cryotherapy

Cryotherapy, LEEP

Cryotherapy, LEEP, cold knife

Cryotherapy, LEEP, cold knife

Simple and radical hysterectomy

Simple and radical hysterectomy

Intervention
Breast cancer: LICs

Breast cancer: MICs

Total mastectomy
a

Cervical cancer: LICs
Diagnosis
Curative surgical treatment
Precancerous
Invasive cancer

Refer to higher center

Refer to higher center

Palliative surgical treatment

″

″

Adjuvant therapy

″

″

Chemo

Chemo, RTa

HPV test, VIA or
cytology

HPV test, VIA or cytology,
colposcopy, biopsy

HPV test, cytology, colposcopy,
biopsy

HPV test, cytology, colposcopy,
biopsy

Precancerous

Cryotherapy

Cryotherapy, LEEP, cold knife

Cryotherapy, LEEP, cold knife

Cryotherapy, LEEP, cold knife

Invasive cancer

Refer to higher center

Simple hysterectomy;
advanced cancer, refer to
higher center

Simple and radical hysterectomy

Radical trachelectomy,
hysterectomy, pelvic exenteration

Cervical cancer: MICs
Diagnosis
Curative surgical treatment

Palliative surgical treatment

″

Adjuvant therapy

″

Chemob

Chemo, RT

Chemo, RT

Diagnosis

Refer to higher center

Biopsy

Biopsy + histopathology

Biopsy + histopathology

Curative surgical treatment

″

Resection of early-stage
cancers

Resection of early and advanced

Resection of early and advanced

Palliative surgical treatment

″

Refer to higher center

For debulking/pain relief

For debulking/pain relief

Adjuvant therapy

″

″

Oral cancer: LICs

a

RT ± chemo

RTa ± chemo
table continues next page

Surgical Services for Cancer Care

229

Table 13.3 Delivery Platforms for Priority Surgical Cancer Interventions in LICs and MICs (continued)
Community health
center

District (first-level)
hospital

Regional (second-level)
hospital

Diagnosis

Refer to higher center

Biopsy

Biopsy + histopathology

Biopsy + histopathology

Curative surgical treatment

″

Resection of early-stage
cancers

Resection of early and advanced ±
oncoplastics

Resection of early and advanced
± oncoplastics

Palliative treatment

″

Refer to higher center

For debulking/pain relief

For debulking/pain relief

Adjuvant therapy

″

″

RT ± chemo

RTa ± chemo

Diagnosis

Refer to higher center

gFOBT/FIT + referral for
colonoscopy

Sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy

Sigmoidoscopy/colonoscopy

Curative surgical treatment

″

Colectomyb

Colectomy, APRb, LARb

Colectomy, APR, LAR

Palliative surgical treatment

″

Colostomy for bowel
obstruction

Colostomy for bowel obstruction

Colostomy for bowel obstruction

Adjuvant therapy

″

Refer to higher center

Chemo ± RTa

Chemo ± RTa

Diagnosis

FOBT + referral for
colonoscopy

Colonoscopy + biopsyb

Colonoscopy + biopsy

Colonoscopy + biopsy

Curative surgical treatment

Refer to higher center

Colectomy

Colectomy, APR, LAR

Colectomy, APR, LAR

Palliative surgical treatment

″

Colostomy for bowel
obstruction

Colostomy for bowel obstruction

Colostomy for bowel obstruction

Adjuvant therapy

″

Chemoa,b

Chemo ± RT

Chemo ± RT

Intervention

Tertiary (third-level) hospital

Oral cancer: MICs

a

Colorectal cancer: LICs

Colorectal cancer: MICs

Note: APR = abdominoperineal resection; BCS = breast-conserving surgery; CBC = complete blood count; FIT = fecal immunochemical test; FNA = fine needle aspiration; FNAB = fine-needle
aspiration biopsy; FOBT = fecal occult blood test; gFOBT = guaiac fecal occult blood test; HPV = human papillomavirus; LAR = lower anterior resection; LEEP = loop electrocautery excision
procedure; LFT = liver function test; LICs = low-income countries; MICs = middle-income countries; MRM = modified radical mastectomy; RT = radiotherapy; SLNB = sentinel lymph node biopsy;
US = ultrasound; VIA = visual inspection of the cervix after acetic acid application; XR = x-ray; ± = with or without; ″ = repeats above.
a. If available within a country’s resource level.
b. Provision at this level will be dependent on the availability of appropriate equipment, supplies, monitoring, and adequately trained providers.

complex to achieve adequate resection margins and
wound closure. Platforms capable of delivering complex cancer and surgical care are often not available in
LICs, especially outside the capital city. In addition to
these priority cancers, other complex cancers (for example, musculoskeletal, thoracic, or hepatobiliary cancers)
require surgical treatment within third-level platforms,
usually by specialist surgeons.
Treatment with Palliative Intent Palliative surgery
can significantly enhance the quality of life and allow
patients to return home for end-of-life care. Palliative
care for all patients with advanced-stage cancer hinges
on access to appropriate analgesics, including opioids
(see chapter 9). Surgery also has an important role in
palliation, particularly in regions in which advanced
presentations with very large, debilitating tumors are
common. Palliative treatment should be provided within
delivery platforms as close to patients’ homes as possible.

230

Cancer

Palliative surgical procedures commonly required
in LMICs include mastectomy for bulky, fungating,
or bleeding tumors and formation of a colostomy for
obstructing colorectal tumors. In LICs, palliative colostomy formation or mastectomy can be performed within
a second-level platform, or potentially at a first-level
facility when resources permit. In MICs, most first-level
platforms are equipped to provide this level of surgical
care. Palliative surgical treatment must be undertaken
cautiously. It should be made clear that the procedure
is being done to improve the quality of life, rather than
to extend it. Advanced disease has higher operative and
postoperative risks; the risks and benefits of the procedure must be weighed carefully by providers and patients.
Adjuvant Treatment Considerations
Cancer treatment with surgery alone is only effective
in early-stage disease. In resource-constrained settings,
most patients tend to present with advanced disease, and

adjuvant therapy is usually required in addition to surgical resection. Strong coordination of surgical services
and adjuvant services is needed to maximize outcomes,
and additional considerations present with respect to
the most appropriate surgical platform for patients who
require both surgical care and adjuvant therapy.
In LMICs, platforms for basic surgical cancer care
are likely to be more widely available than for adjuvant
treatment, particularly radiotherapy. When planning
cancer services, policy makers need to consider not only
where surgical services are provided, but also how these
are distributed in relation to where adjuvant therapy—
including hormonal therapy, chemotherapy, radiotherapy, and biologics—can be provided. The availability
of these services may dictate whether surgical treatment is appropriate and the type of intervention to be
performed.
In many LMICs, the surgical providers are often
responsible for prescribing and/or administering adjuvant therapy. This is very common when adjuvant
endocrine therapy is required in the setting of breast
cancer, for example, tamoxifen. Adjuvant chemotherapy
is also often given by general surgeons, physicians, and
even patients’ families in LMICs. Ideally, chemotherapy
should be delivered in a comprehensive cancer center
by specialist staff within a second- or third-level platform to ensure appropriate, high-quality care. However,
these stipulations place chemotherapy out of reach for
many LICs. Where significant barriers exist to accessing
chemotherapy and prevent uptake, preoperative or postoperative first-line chemotherapy can be administered
by trained surgeons, general physicians, or nurses at
first- or second-level hospitals, using clinical guidelines
and management algorithms to guide treatment selection, if appropriate blood tests are available to monitor
complications. Such polyskilling (where a provider is
trained to deliver more than one type of cancer care)
can be used to overcome human resource shortages and
minimize referral delays.
The delivery of radiotherapy is limited by its availability; in all LICs and most MICs, delivery requires
referral to a regional or national platform. The availability and accessibility of radiotherapy at a higher
center do not necessitate the delivery of surgical care
at the same center, although there may be advantages
in doing so.
Centralized versus Decentralized Delivery Models
Delivery platforms for surgical cancer services must
necessarily be organized into an overall delivery model
within a country. It is useful to consider the benefits
and risks of different models of surgical cancer service

Table 13.4 Benefits and Risks of Centralized versus Decentralized
Surgical Cancer Platforms
Centralized surgical platforms for
cancer

Decentralized surgical platforms
for cancer

Benefits

Benefits

• Standardization of care, higher
operative volumes, and specialist
surgical care for quality assurance

• Improved coverage and access for
greater equity

• Economies of scale
• “One-stop shop” for cancer services
• Multidisciplinary practice for better
outcomes
• Research and training activities that
drive practice forward

• Reduced direct nonmedical and
indirect costs to patients and
families, because of reduced travel
time and productivity loss
• Reduced referral delays between
presentation and definitive care
• Surgical platform more costeffective at the first or second level
(Debas and others 2006)

Risks

Risks

• Reduced access and increased
inequity for rural versus urban
populations

• Inefficient clinical services and
duplication

• May encourage super-specialization
and workforce maldistribution

• Poor coordination and access to
higher-level centers and other
cancer disciplines, causing delayed
or missed adjuvant care
• Poorer quality care

delivery; balancing quality and efficiency with access
and coverage demands is a key challenge in delivering
surgical cancer care in LMICs. Centralized, specialist
surgical platforms for cancer services generally promote
quality and efficiency, whereas strengthening delivery
platforms peripherally tends to enhance access and coverage (table 13.4).
Referral Networks, Service Coordination, and
Partnerships
The delivery of surgical cancer care requires functional
clinical platforms, as well as strong referral networks and
coordination between other cancer services and providers.
Strategies to improve the coordination and links
among all platforms providing cancer services can promote high-quality, standardized, and efficient surgical
cancer care. For example, India has developed a National
Cancer Grid (Pramesh, Badwe, and Sinha 2014), funded
by the Government of India, which links facilities providing cancer care, with the goal of standardizing the
quality of care, developing uniform guidelines, reducing the variations in care, and facilitating exchanges of
expertise and experience between larger and smaller
centers. Such links also strengthen referral capabilities

Surgical Services for Cancer Care

231

and provider coordination. This is particularly important when diagnostic, surgical, and adjuvant services are
spread across different facilities.
Comprehensive cancer centers with multidisciplinary
cancer teams have been shown to be the most effective
strategy for ensuring high-quality, efficient, and appropriate cancer care in HICs (chapter 11 in this volume;
Yip and others 2011). The severe shortage of specialist
health workers makes it almost impossible to achieve
comprehensive, multidisciplinary centers currently in
LICs and difficult to achieve in a manner that ensures
high coverage and equity in many MICs. However, even
in the absence of a highly specialized cancer workforce,
some LMICs are beginning to develop regional or
national cancer centers, drawing on expertise within
general second- or third-level hospitals. Often, one or
two surgeons within a country become well known for
providing cancer care and serve as references for the rest
of the country, with high numbers of patients referred
to them. These reference surgeons and the large urban
hospitals in which they typically work can serve as a
major focus to drive forward cancer care within countries, provided they are well supported. Although not all
surgical cancer services need to be provided at this level,
the presence of such centers may strengthen the surgical
care provided at other locations through the exchange
of knowledge and experience and the strengthening of
referral networks.
International partnerships between LMICs or
between LMICs and HICs also support the development
and delivery of cancer care, including surgical cancer
care in low-resource environments. The most effective
international partnerships are those that seek to develop
local cancer care capacity and that are closely aligned
with local needs. The practice of short-term surgical
trips that focus on operative resection only, use entirely
foreign surgical teams to deliver care, and do not participate in teaching or local capacity-building efforts is not
generally an effective model for cancer care.

STRENGTHENING SURGICAL SYSTEMS AND
BUILDING CAPACITY
Conducting Baseline Assessment of Capacity
At the country level, policy makers will consider several
key elements, especially when considering the most
appropriate delivery platforms:
• Burden of cancer
• Stage at diagnosis
• Availability and distribution of surgical and cancerspecific resources in relation to the population and

232

Cancer

the available resources, current and projected, for the
scale-up of cancer care and surgical services
A situational analysis of current surgical and cancer
capacity within a country should precede policy, planning, and scale-up efforts (box 13.1).
Developing the Surgical Workforce
Human resources are a crucial component of surgical
cancer services, and the development of an effective workforce requires proactive strategic planning
at the national level. LICs and many MICS require
urgent investment in strengthening the surgical, anesthetic, and supporting cancer workforce—including
pathologists, radiotherapists, and nurses trained in
perioperative and wound care. The surgical and anesthetic workforce takes time to develop—a minimum of
10 years from entry into medical school to qualification
as an accredited surgeon or anesthetist—and workforce
planning must take into account projected as well as
current needs. Many LICs lack postgraduate surgical
training programs and must pay to send their doctors
outside the country (and sometimes outside the region
or continent) for further training after medical school.
This requirement is costly and increases the likelihood
that the home countries will not be able to retain the
doctors upon training completion. Creating the capacity for accredited postgraduate surgical training in LICs
has been shown to be effective and sustainable, allowing
countries to achieve national health goals (Anderson
and others 2014).
Task-shifting of general surgical procedures—for
example, laparotomy, cesarean section, and fracture
repair—to nonphysician providers is increasingly used
to overcome critical surgical workforce shortages in
many LMICs. In Malawi, 93 percent of the surgical
workforce is composed of nonphysicians (Henry and
others 2014). However, this process poses risks for
developing surgical cancer services. It is generally agreed
that task-shifting to nonphysicians for cancer surgery is
not possible owing to case complexity and quality concerns. The failure to address the shortage of surgeons in
LMICs and the overreliance on nonphysician surgical
providers to deliver surgical services will significantly
hamper the ability of countries to respond to the substantial projected increase in cancer requiring surgical
treatment in the future. Attempts to address the surgical
workforce crisis need to focus on increasing the number
of surgeons through recruitment and retention to ensure
long-term success in meeting surgical needs. Training of
surgical nursing staff is also critical to ensure optimal
postoperative care and surgical outcomes.

In settings with an adequate surgical workforce, as in
some MICs, expanding the skills of the existing workforce to provide quality surgical cancer services through
ongoing training will improve outcomes and maximize
health gains.
Improving Infrastructure and Procurement Processes
The significant deficits in basic infrastructure, equipment, supplies, and procurement processes in many
LMICs need to be addressed early in any scale-up plans.
These deficits include an absence of reliable power,
water, and oxygen, as well as insufficient or dilapidated
operating theaters and surgical and sterility equipment and supplies. Attention to the development of
sustainable supply chains and procurement practices
is important. Improving and developing the surgical
infrastructure within countries often requires capital
outlays; in LICs, these costs may need to be met through
development assistance.
Further research is needed as to the most appropriate and cost-effective infrastructure and equipment
for surgical cancer care specific to the resource level.
In some cases, the use of technology in LMICs, for
example, human papillomavirus DNA testing, can
lead to leapfrogging of cancer delivery models over

HICs and assist in detecting cases at stages amenable
to curative surgical treatment. However, the greatest
overall gains are likely to come from the planned
development of more basic surgical infrastructure,
with good population coverage, rather than the ad
hoc purchasing or donation of state-of-the art technology or facilities that can be accessed by only a small
percentage of the population. Maintenance and repair
of surgical infrastructure and equipment are major
challenges; an estimated 40 percent of the equipment
in LMICs is out of service, compared with less than
1 percent in HICs (Howitt and others 2012). The
inappropriate deployment of medical technologies
from HICs to LMICs is a significant contributor to
this problem.
Promoting Quality and Ensuring Safety
Prerequisite to the scale-up of surgical cancer services is
consideration of how to promote and ensure quality and
safety. These are fundamental components for achieving
good outcomes and building community trust in cancer
and surgical care. All countries can embrace the goal of
high-quality and safe surgical care, regardless of development status. Specific strategies for LMICs are listed
in box 13.2.

Box 13.2

Strategies to Improve the Quality of Surgical Cancer Services in LMICs
All LMICs
• Clinical management guidelines and surgical
standards developed specifically for low-resource
settings
• Collection of outcome data
• Case fatality rates
• Risk-adjusted postoperative mortality rates
• Morbidity and mortality meetings and clinical
audits
• Encouraged reflection on practice and identification of areas for improvement
• Multidisciplinary approach to diagnosis and
treatment management
• Local
• International, for example, via telemedicine
links

• CME for all surgical cancer providers
• CME and regular courses for updates on surgical technique, patient selection, postoperative care, and systemic therapy
LIC-specific strategies
• Focus on developing strong general surgical
services and referral mechanisms
• Operation within the limits of the human
and infrastructural resources to reduce poor
outcomes
• Establishment of formal links among centers providing surgical and cancer care within a country,
especially between different referral levels
• Development of international twinning arrangements
box continues next page

Surgical Services for Cancer Care

233

Box 13.2 (continued)
• Support for training, diagnosis, and case management decisions in centers providing cancer care
• South-South
• North-South
• Local and international NGOs
MIC-specific strategies
• Development of regional and national comprehensive cancer centers
• Provision of locally appropriate management
guidelines for own country
• Provision of training support and outreach
clinical services for peripheral facilities

Scaling Up Surgical Services for Cancer
The requirements for the scale-up of surgical services
to meet cancer needs are country specific, dependent
on current and projected patterns of disease, available
health resources and health systems capacity, amounts
of domestic spending on health, and distribution of
the population. Some general recommendations can
be made, however, to guide policy makers based on the
resource patterns, income level, and development status.
LICs should initially focus on building general surgical capacity and inpatient care within their health
systems, including investing in human resources and
hospital infrastructure and developing effective supply
chains and referral networks. Without these fundamentals in place, it is not appropriate to embark on cancer
surgery–specific treatment planning. Adequate general
surgical capacity will allow countries to deliver the
surgical components of the minimum cancer intervention package, such as diagnosis and treatment of breast
cancer and treatment of precancerous cervical lesions,
at the basic resource level. Importantly, it will also serve
as a base for the effective scale-up of a range of cancerspecific services.
In MICs with basic or limited surgical resources in
place, the focus should be on developing coordinated
and context-specific cancer systems and services that
improve the quality and standards and ensure equitable access to surgical cancer care through sound public
policy and health governance. Many MICs have national
health programs, services, and structures geared to the
delivery of vertical programs, rather than horizontal
health system–based approaches (Anderson and others 2014). Surgical care may be present, but coordination

234

Cancer

• Establishment of cancer grids or partnerships
• Encourage collaboration and standardization
of surgical care
• Development of regional and national cancer
registries to track outcomes
• Requirements for mandatory reporting of
case volumes, procedures, and outcomes in
all sectors providing surgical cancer services
(government, private for-profit, and private
not-for-profit)
Note: CME = continuing medical education; LICs = low-income countries;
LMICs = low- and middle-income countries; MICs = middle-income countries;
NGOs = nongovernmental organizations.

and delivery within a functioning health system may be
weak. As countries move beyond the most basic package
of cancer care delivered within a single clinical encounter, they will require complex and highly coordinated
delivery systems, with surgical care embedded within.
Improving governance and regulation around surgical
service provision will assist MICs to improve quality,
reduce waste and inefficiency, and promote equity.
Large imbalances between private and public sector
provision of surgical cancer services are seen in some
MICs, such as India. Unregulated, these imbalances
can drain resources (for example, higher salaries in
the private sector drain surgeons away from the public
sector), hinder quality and transparency (for example,
through inappropriate, nonstandardized, or unwanted
surgical treatment), increase medical impoverishment
(for example, treating patients until finances have run
out and then transferring them to the public sector),
and create a two-tiered system of cancer care (Flores and
others 2008; Pramesh and others 2014).
Complementing steps to improve surgical capacity is
the need to simultaneously focus on removing patient
barriers to the uptake of surgical cancer services to
improve cancer outcomes and promote equity. Delayed
presentation increases the morbidity, mortality, and
micro- and macroeconomic costs associated with cancer.
As countries move to introduce financial risk protection and progressive universal health coverage for their
populations, there is a need to ensure coverage for a basic
package of inpatient care, including surgical care, early in
the expansion pathway (Jamison and others 2013).
Cancer care requires strong, coordinated health systems and services, rather than an isolated focus on

surgical services. Early detection and comprehensive
treatment improve cancer outcomes. Improving the
rate of surgical cure in LMICs requires coordinated
efforts across the health system to achieve stage-shifting,
combined with efforts to improve surgical capacity to
deliver effective treatment. For example, clinical breast
examination provided at a community-level platform
by trained allied health workers has led to stage-shifting
of breast cancer in India, making it more amenable to
surgical cure (Sankaranarayanan and others 2011).

There have been few economic evaluations of cancer
care in LMICs; among these, surgical interventions
and surgical services have received almost no attention. Tables 16.3 to 16.8 in chapter 16 summarize the
available cost-effectiveness evidence for the detection
and treatment of the priority cancers considered in this
volume. Notably, surgical interventions that are feasible
at the basic, limited, and enhanced resource levels have
barely been assessed, even in upper-middle-income
countries. Chemotherapy, in comparison, is a far more
studied treatment modality, given concerns about its
high cost and poor accessibility, regardless of resource
level. For example, in a systematic review of the Tufts
Medical Center Cost-Effectiveness Analysis Registry of
cancer-related studies set mainly in HICs, 53.3 percent
of the studies were concerned with pharmaceutical
interventions, compared with 13.3 percent with surgical
interventions (Greenberg and others 2010).
Yet, surgery is the most significant life-saving intervention in cancer treatment. Coupled with their wider
roles in the cancer care spectrum, as a diagnostic modality and in palliative care, surgery and surgical services
have the potential to be good-value choices for health
care investment in LMICs. The expansion of surgical
interventions for solid tumors routinely found at early
stages is recommended in this volume based on feasibility, at even basic and limited resource levels, and suggested cost-effectiveness evidence from higher resource
levels (chapter 16 in this volume).

specific to the local cost structure and, especially given
the heterogeneity of health care financing in MICs, are
not generalizable to other countries. The results often
reflect the increasing ability and desire of individuals
and governments to pay for a perceived (if unsupported)
qualitative improvement in outcomes, balanced against
increased costs of more expensive (often imported)
equipment, more highly trained personnel, and more
supporting services. However, these studies also often
provide insights into and implications for the structuring of health care financing and equitable access.
In reviews of the literature, basic surgical services
in a variety of low-resource settings were reported to
be cost-effective or very cost-effective, according to the
World Health Organization threshold definitions (Chao
and others 2014; Grimes and others 2014). Local costing
studies and partial economic evaluations (for example,
where costs or effectiveness components are assessed
but not directly linked) or evaluations from narrower
perspectives (for example, from provider or patient perspectives rather than societal perspectives) can provide
insights for inputs into fuller cost-effectiveness studies or
for intervention adaptation in implementation. Detailed
costing of surgery procedures, excluding preoperative and
postoperative care, in a selection of hospitals of varying
resources and settings in India showed that the salaries
and benefits of operating theater staff formed 42 percent
of the cost of a hysterectomy in a first-level hospital, compared with 48 percent in a third-level hospital (Chatterjee
and Laxminarayan 2013). Overhead costs were higher at
the first-level hospital, however, constituting 30 percent
versus 20 percent of hysterectomy costs at the thirdlevel hospital. This finding suggests that if the outcomes
are similar, it may be equally or more cost-effective to
perform simple hysterectomies at a first-level hospital,
thereby improving access for a wider population in India.
In costing breast cancer care in central Vietnam, a
lower-middle-income country, Lan and others (2013)
found the surgical treatment, while a large cost component, was significantly less expensive than chemotherapy.
Over a five-year course of care for breast cancer that
included diagnosis, initial treatment, and follow-up
care, surgery accounted for 8.4 percent of the total cost
(Lan and others 2013).

Economic Studies
In the enhanced resource settings of MICs, limited
cost-effectiveness analyses of comparisons between
simple and enhanced surgical techniques or between
surgery and other treatment modalities are emerging
(He and others 2011; Lu and others 2012; Tan and others
2013). The results are set in single hospitals and are very

Financing
In many LMICs, out-of-pocket payment for surgical
cancer services may be the main form of financing
(Ilbawi, Einterz, and Nkusu 2013). Lan and others (2013)
found that the absence of health insurance or financial
risk protection from the costs of cancer care in Vietnam
was the main barrier to the uptake of breast cancer

ECONOMIC CONSIDERATIONS OF SURGICAL
CANCER CARE IN LMICs

Surgical Services for Cancer Care

235

treatment services. The impoverishment impact of surgical conditions on a household is immense, especially in
the context of cancer. In a study in rural Bangladesh, the
impoverishment rates from cancer hospitalization and
surgical procedures were four- to sevenfold higher than
the impoverishment average of 3.4 percent for all health
services (Hamid, Ahsan, and Begum 2014). High user
fees and out-of-pocket payments also increase the likelihood that patients will not return at all for definitive
surgical care. In a study of patients presenting at a firstlevel hospital in rural Cameroon, preoperative payment
greater than US$310 and a recommended procedure for
cancer significantly increased the likelihood of patients
not returning for surgical care as advised following an
initial assessment (Ilbawi, Einterz, and Nkusu 2013).
Gaps in the Economic Evidence
The dearth of economic evaluations for surgical cancer
services means that many knowledge gaps exist in making investment decisions. This section identifies some of
the fundamental areas that can be addressed to start an
economic evidence base of cancer surgery interventions
and surgical services.
Burden
Country-level estimates of the health burden of resectable cancer, refined by site, incidence, and stage, are
unknown but required for the underlying foundation
of an economic evidence base. Estimates of avertable
burden help direct the considerable resources needed for
economic evaluations to appropriate areas of research,
identify proper comparators, and give a measure against
which to weigh costs. In the United States, 61.4 percent
of patients admitted to hospital with a cancer diagnosis
required a surgical procedure (Rose and others 2014).
Similar country-level estimates for operative cancer need
in LMICs are not available. Given the increasing and
changing burden of cancer (see chapter 2 in this volume)
relative to communicable diseases and among sites and
nations, the extent of the potential value of surgical
treatments needs to be quantified.
Costing
There is a general lack of costing studies on which to
build cost-effectiveness studies of surgical cancer services. As a first step, those that exist for general surgical
services, such as the hospital-based studies of Chatterjee
and Laxminarayan (2013), could be validated for surgical cancer services. This process requires the characterization and differentiation of cancer surgery costs
versus general surgery costs, including the appropriate
apportioning of overhead costs to cancer surgery and

236

Cancer

the differential training of personnel. In LMICs in particular, there is need for costing of the surgical cancer
systems, processes, and platforms that would allow the
identification of minimized patient travel time and
related productivity costs.
Effectiveness
The short- and long-term effectiveness of surgical
services in cancer cure and control, measured at the
national and sub-national level, could be estimated to
better inform cost-effectiveness analyses. The efficacy
of cancer surgery may be severely compromised by poor
access to supporting cancer services, including chemotherapy and radiotherapy, or by poor quality surgical
care. However, there has been little evaluation of the
potential impact of this on cancer outcomes in LMICs.

CONCLUSIONS
Surgical services are a central component of cancer cure
and control in all resource settings, playing a key role
in the diagnosis, treatment, and palliation of most solid
tumors. Basic surgical cancer care can be affordable and
effective, even in countries with substantial resource
constraints. This fact has not been well recognized in
previous dialogues on cancer control in LMICs.
Major resourcing, geographic, financial, and sociocultural barriers to access to surgical cancer services exist
in many LMICs. Given the high case-fatality rates from
common malignancies such as breast cancer in LMICs,
as well as the large projected increase in cancer incidence in these regions over the next 20 years, countries
would benefit from strategic and proactive approaches
to the planning and delivery of surgical cancer services.
Unfortunately, very little is known about the most effective or cost-effective delivery platforms for surgical cancer care in LMICs to guide policy makers, or about how
applicable or transferable models and lessons from HICs
are to low-resource settings. Current models of care
delivery in LMICs have been largely developed through
experience, pragmatism, and consensus, rather than
through rigorous academic or economic evaluation.
Key considerations in the scale-up of surgical cancer
care in LMICs that are supported by evidence include
the urgent need to develop the surgical workforce,
improve basic general and surgical infrastructure, and
strengthen supporting services. Coordinated integration
of surgical services with other cancer services and the
development of cancer networks and partnerships are
also required to promote quality and standards.
Most important, efforts to improve surgical capacity
in LMICs need to be coupled with strategies to promote cancer stage-shifting. Resource-appropriate efforts

across the health system to facilitate the early detection
of surgically treatable cancers and reduce barriers to
timely service uptake are required to realize fully the
curative benefits—as well as the associated social and
economic gains—that surgery can offer.

NOTES
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income per
capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries: US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries:
a) Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
b) Upper-middle-income: US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries: US$12,746 or more
1. Typically, a country’s income level and development status track with its health resource level. However, this is not
always the case; there may be significant variation within
countries in resource availability, according to geography
and income quintile.

REFERENCES
Adebamowo, C. A., and O. O. Ajayi. 2000. “Breast Cancer in
Nigeria.” West African Journal of Medicine 19 (3): 179–91.
Agarwal, G., P. Ramakant, E. R. Forgach, J. C. Rendón,
J. M. Chaparro, and others. 2009. “Breast Cancer Care in
Developing Countries.” World Journal of Surgery 33 (10):
2069–76.
Anderson, F. W., S. A. Obed, E. L. Boothman, and H. Opare-Ado.
2014. “The Public Health Impact of Training Physicians
to Become Obstetricians and Gynecologists in Ghana.”
American Journal of Public Health 104 (Suppl. 1): S159–65.
doi:10.2105/Ajph.2013.301581.
Anyanwu, S. N. 2000. “Breast Cancer in Eastern Nigeria:
A Ten Year Review.” West African Journal of Medicine 19 (2):
120–25.
———. 2008. “Temporal Trends in Breast Cancer Presentation
in the Third World.” Journal of Experimental and Clinical
Cancer Research 27: 17. doi:10.1186/1756-9966-27-17.
Bae, J. Y., R. S. Groen, and A. L. Kushner. 2011. “Surgery as
a Public Health Intervention: Common Misconceptions
versus the Truth.” Bulletin of the World Health Organization
89 (6): 395.
Bainbridge, D., J. Martin, M. Arango, and D. Cheng. 2012.
“Perioperative and Anaesthetic-Related Mortality in
Developed and Developing Countries: A Systematic Review
and Meta-Analysis.” The Lancet 380: 1075–81.
Binagwaho, A., F. Ngabo, C. M. Wagner, C. Mugeni, M. Gatera,
and others. 2013. “Integration of Comprehensive Women’s
Health Programmes into Health Systems: Cervical Cancer
Prevention, Care and Control in Rwanda.” Bulletin of the

World Health Organization 91 (9): 697–703. doi:10.2471/
Blt.12.116087.
Chao, T. E., K. Sharma, M. Mandigo, L. Hagander, S. C. Resch,
and others. 2014. “Cost-Effectiveness of Surgery and Its
Policy Implications for Global Health: A Systematic Review
and Analysis.” The Lancet Global Health 2 (6): E334–45.
Chatterjee, S., and R. Laxminarayan. 2013. “Costs of Surgical
Procedures in Indian Hospitals.” British Medical Journal
Open 3 (6).
Daher, M. 2012. “Cultural Beliefs and Values in Cancer
Patients.” Annals of Oncology 23 (Suppl. 3): 66–69.
Debas, H. T., P. Donkor, A. Gawande, D. T. Jamison, M. Kruk,
and C. Mock. 2015. Essential Surgery. Volume 1 of
Disease Control Priorities in Developing Countries, 3rd
ed., edited by D. T. Jamison, H. Gelband, S. Horton,
P. Jha, R. Laxminarayan, and R. Nugent. Washington, DC:
World Bank.
Debas, H., R. Gosselin, C. McCord, and A. Thind. 2006.
“Surgery.” In Disease Control Priorities in Developing
Countries, 2nd ed., edited by D. T. Jamison, J. Breman,
A. R. Measham, G. Alleyne, M. Claeson, D. B. Evans, P. Jha,
A. Mills, and P. Musgrove, 1245–59. Washington, DC:
World Bank and Oxford University Press.
Dickens, C., M. Joffe, J. Jacobson, F. Venter, J. Schüz, and
others. 2014. “Stage at Breast Cancer Diagnosis and
Distance from Diagnostic Hospital in a Periurban
Setting.” International Journal of Cancer 135 (9): 2173–82.
doi:10.1002/Ijc.28861.
Farmer, P. E., and J. Y. Kim. 2008. “Surgery and Global Health:
A View from beyond the OR.” World Journal of Surgery
32 (4): 533–36.
Ferlay J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser,
and others. 2013. GLOBOCAN 2012 v1.0, Cancer
Incidence and Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase
No. 11. [Internet]. International Agency for Research on
Cancer, Lyon, France. http://globocan.iarc.fr, accessed on
01/September/2014.
Ferlay, J., E. Steliarova-Foucher, J. Lortet-Tieulent, S. Rosso,
J. W. W. Coebergh, and others. 2013. “Cancer Incidence and
Mortality Patterns in Europe: Estimates for 40 Countries in
2012.” European Journal of Cancer 49 (6): 1374–403.
Flores, G., J. Krishnakumar, O. O’Donnell, and E. Van Doorslaer.
2008. “Coping with Health-Care Costs: Implications for the
Measurement of Catastrophic Expenditures and Poverty.”
Health Economics 17: 1393–412.
Funk, L. M., T. G. Weiser, W. R. Berry, S. R. Lipsitz, A. F. Merry,
and others. 2010. “Global Operating Theatre Distribution
and Pulse Oximetry Supply: An Estimation from Reported
Data.” The Lancet 376 (9746): 1055–61.
Glenshaw, M., and F. D. Madzimbamuto. 2005. “Anaesthesia
Associated Mortality in a District Hospital in Zimbabwe.”
Central African Journal of Medicine 51: 39–44.
Goss, P. E., K. Strasser-Weippl, B. L. Lee-Bychkovsky, L. Fan,
J. Li, and others. 2014. “Challenges to Effective Cancer
Control in China, India and Russia.” The Lancet Oncology
15: 489–538.
Greenberg, D., C. Earle, C. H. Fang, A. Eldar-Lissai, and
P. J. Neumann. 2010. “When Is Cancer Care Cost-Effective?

Surgical Services for Cancer Care

237

A Systematic Overview of Cost-Utility Analyses in
Oncology.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 102 (2):
82–88.
Grimes, C. E., J. A. Henry, J. Maraka, N. C. Mkandawire,
and M. Cotton. 2014. “Cost-Effectiveness of Surgery in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries: A Systematic Review.”
World Journal of Surgery 38 (1): 252–63.
Hamid, S. A., S. M. Ahsan, and A. Begum. 2014. “DiseaseSpecific Impoverishment Impact of Out-of-Pocket Payments
for Health Care: Evidence from Rural Bangladesh.” Applied
Health Economics and Health Policy 12 (4): 421–33.
Hansen, D., S. C. Gausi, and M. Merikebu. 2000. “Anaesthesia
in Malawi: Complications and Deaths.” Tropical Doctor
30: 146–49.
Haynes, A. B., T. G. Weiser, W. R. Berry, S. R. Lipsitz,
A.-H. S. Breizat, and others. 2009. “A Surgical Safety
Checklist to Reduce Morbidity and Mortality in a Global
Population.” New England Journal of Medicine 360 (5):
491–99.
He, J., W. Shao, C. Cao, T. Yan, D. Wang, and others. 2011.
“Long-Term Outcome and Cost-Effectiveness of Complete
versus Assisted Video-Assisted Thoracic Surgery for NonSmall Cell Lung Cancer.” Journal of Surgical Oncology
104 (2): 162–68.
Henry, J. A., E. Frenkel, E. Borgstein, N. C. Mkandawire, and
C. Goddia. 2014. “Surgical and Anaesthetic Capacity of
Hospitals in Malawi: Key Insights.” Health Policy and
Planning doi:10.1093?heapol/czu102.
Howitt, P., A. Darzi, G.-Z. Yang, H. Ashrafian, R. Atun, and
others. 2012. “Technologies for Global Health.” The Lancet
380 (9840): 507–35.
Hoyler, M., S. R. Finlayson, C. D. McClain, J. G. Meara, and
L. Hagander. 2014. “Shortage of Doctors, Shortage of Data:
A Review of the Global Surgery, Obstetrics, and Anesthesia
Workforce Literature.” World Journal of Surgery 38 (2):
269–80.
Ilbawi, A. M., E. M. Einterz, and D. Nkusu. 2013. “Obstacles
to Surgical Services in a Rural Cameroonian District
Hospital.” World Journal of Surgery 37 (6): 1208–15.
Jamison, D. T., L. H. Summers, G. Alleyne, K. J. Arrow,
S. Berkley, and others. 2013. “Global Health 2035: A World
Converging within a Generation.” The Lancet 382 (9908):
1898–955.
Kingham, P., O. I. Alatise, V. Vanderpuye, C. Casper,
F. A. Abantanga, and others. 2013. “Treatment of Cancer
in Sub-Saharan Africa.” The Lancet Oncology 14: E158–67.
Lan, N. H., W. Laohasiriwong, J. F. Stewart, N. Dinh Tung, and
P. C. Coyte. 2013. “Cost of Treatment for Breast Cancer in
Central Vietnam.” Global Health Action 6: 18872.
Lebrun, D. G., S. Chackungal, T. E. Chao, L. M. Knowlton,
A. F. Linden, and others. 2014. “Prioritizing Essential Surgery
and Safe Anesthesia for the Post-2015 Development Agenda:
Operative Capacities of 78 District Hospitals in 7 Low- and
Middle-Income Countries.” Surgery 155 (3): 365–73.
Lu, Z., X. Yi, W. Feng, J. Ding, H. Xu, and others. 2012.
“Cost-Benefit Analysis of Laparoscopic Surgery versus
Laparotomy for Patients with Endometrioid Endometrial

238

Cancer

Cancer: Experience from an Institute in China.” Journal of
Obstetrics and Gynaecology Research 38 (7): 1011–17.
Maman, A. F., A. Ouro-Bang’na, K. Tomta, S. Ahouangbévi,
and M. Chobli. 2005. “Deaths Associated with Anaesthesia
in Togo, West Africa.” Tropical Doctor 35: 220–22.
Ozgediz, D., M. Galukande, J. Mabweijano, S. Kijjambu,
C. Mijumbi, and others. 2008. “The Neglect of the Global
Surgical Workforce: Experience and Evidence from
Uganda.” World Journal of Surgery 32 (6): 1208–15.
Pramesh, C. S., R. A. Badwe, B. B. Borthakur, M. Chandra, E. H. Raj,
and others. 2014. “Delivery of Affordable and Equitable
Cancer Care in India.” The Lancet Oncology 15: E223–33.
Pramesh, C. S., R. A. Badwe, and R. K. Sinha. 2014. “The
National Cancer Grid of India.” Indian Journal of Medical
and Paediatric Oncology 35: 226–27.
Purushotham, A. D., G. Lewison, and R. Sullivan. 2012. “The
State of Research and Development in Global Cancer
Surgery.” Annals of Surgery 255 (3): 427–32.
Rose, J., D. C. Chang, T. G. Weiser, N. J. Kassebaum, and
S. W. Bickler. 2014. “The Role of Surgery in Global Health:
Analysis of United States Inpatient Procedure Frequency
by Condition Using the Global Burden of Disease 2010
Framework.” Plos One 9 (2): E89693. doi:10.1371/Journal
.Pone.0089693.
Sankaranarayanan, R., K. Ramadas, S. Thara, R. Muwonge,
J. Prabhakar, and others. 2011. “Clinical Breast Examination:
Preliminary Results from a Cluster Randomized Controlled
Trial in India.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute
103 (19): 1476–80.
Tan, C., L. Peng, X. Zeng, J. Li, X. Wan, and others. 2013.
“Economic Evaluation of First-Line Adjuvant Chemotherapies for Resectable Gastric Cancer Patients in China.” Plos
One 8 (12): e83396.
Thorat, M. A., A. Rangole, M. S. Nadkarni, V. Parmar, and
R. A. Badwe. 2008. “Revision Surgery for Breast Cancer.”
Cancer 113 (Suppl. 8): 2347–52.
Ukwenya, A. Y., L. M. Yusufu, P. T. Nmadu, E. S. Garba, and
A. Ahmed. 2008. “Delayed Treatment of Symptomatic
Breast Cancer: The Experience from Kaduna, Nigeria.”
South African Journal of Surgery 46: 106–10.
Walker, I. A., and I. H. Wilson. 2008. “Anaesthesia in Developing
Countries: A Risk for Patients.” The Lancet 371 (9617):
968–69.
Weiser, T. G., S. E. Regenbogen, K. D. Thompson, A. B. Haynes,
S. R. Lipsitz, and others. 2008. “An Estimation of the
Global Volume of Surgery: A Modelling Strategy Based on
Available Data.” The Lancet 372 (9633): 139–44.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2003. Surgical Care at the
District Hospital. Geneva: WHO.
Yip, C. H., and B. O. Anderson. 2007. “The Breast Health Global
Initiative: Clinical Practice Guidelines for Management
of Breast Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.”
Expert Reviews in Anticancer Therapy 7 (8): 1095–104.
Yip, C. H., E. Cazap, B. O. Anderson, K. L. Bright, M. Caleffi,
and others. 2011. “Breast Cancer Management in MiddleResource Countries (MRCs): Consensus Statement from
the Breast Health Global Initiative.” The Breast 20: S12–19.

Chapter

14

Radiation Therapy for Cancer
David A. Jaffray and Mary K. Gospodarowicz

INTRODUCTION
More than 14 million new cases of cancer are diagnosed
globally each year; radiation therapy (RT) has the
potential to improve the rates of cure of 3.5 million
people and provide palliative relief for an additional
3.5 million people. These conservative estimates are
based on the fact that approximately 50 percent of all
cancer patients can benefit from RT in the management
of their disease (Barton, Frommer, and Shafiq 2006;
Barton and others 2014; Tyldesley and others 2011);
of these, approximately half present early enough to
pursue curative intent.
Soon after Roentgen’s discovery of X-rays in 1895,
ionizing radiation was applied to the treatment of cancer, with remarkable results. Carefully controlled doses
of ionizing radiation induce damage to the DNA in cells,
with preferential effects on cancer cells compared with
normal tissues, providing treatment benefits in most
types of cancer and saving lives.
RT is now recognized as an essential element of an
effective cancer care program throughout the world,
regardless of countries’ economic status. RT is used
to cure cancers that are localized; it also can provide
local control—complete response with no recurrence
in the treated area—or symptom relief in cancers that
are locally advanced or disseminated (Gunderson and
Tepper 2012). It is frequently used in combination with
surgery, either preoperatively or postoperatively, as well
as in combination with systemic chemotherapy before,

during, or subsequent to the course of RT (Barton and
others 2014).
Because radiation affects normal tissues and tumors,
achieving an acceptable therapeutic ratio—defined as
the probability of tumor control versus the probability
of unacceptable toxicity—requires that the radiation
dose be delivered within very tightly controlled tolerances with less than 5 percent deviation. This controlled
production and precise application of radiation requires
specialized equipment that is maintained and operated
by a team of trained personnel. The team includes,
at a minimum, radiation oncologists to prescribe the
appropriate dose, medical physicists to ensure accurate
dose delivery, and radiation technologists to operate the
equipment and guide patients through the radiation
process. Radiation oncologists work within multidisciplinary teams with medical and surgical oncologists to
coordinate a multidisciplinary approach to the management of cancer. A comprehensive cancer center provides
the full scope of RT services, ranging from externally
applied beams of X-rays to the placement of radiation-emitting sources within tumors (see chapter 11 in
this volume [Gospodarowicz and others 2015]).
RT is one of the more cost-effective cancer treatment modalities, despite the need for substantial capital
investment in the facilities and equipment. Concerns
about the initial investment, however, have resulted in
severely limited access in most low- and middle-income
countries (LMICs). Increasing the supply of RT services
is critical to expanding effective cancer treatment in

Corresponding author: David A. Jaffray, University of Toronto, Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, and TECHNA Institute, David.Jaffray@rmp.uhn.on.ca.

239

these settings and improving equity in access (AbdelWahab and others 2013; Fisher and others 2014; Goss
and others 2013; Jaffray and Gospodarowicz 2014;
Rodin and others 2014; Rosenblatt and others 2013).

USES OF RADIATION THERAPY
RT is an essential element of curative treatment of cancers of the breast, prostate, cervix, head and neck, lung,
and brain, as well as sarcomas. The first four cancers are
common in LMICs (Barton and others 2014; Delaney,
Jacob, and Barton 2005b; Engstrom and others 2010;
Gregoire and others 2010; Petrelli and others 2014;
Pfister and others 2013; Ramos, Benavente, and Giralt
2010; Souchon and others 2009; Tyldesley and others
2011). RT is also used extensively in the management
of prostate cancer (Delaney, Jacob, and Barton 2005a;
Tyldesley and others 2011).
Patients with hematologic malignancies are primarily treated with chemotherapy, but they also access RT
resources (Barton and others 2014). Total body irradiation is used in the treatment of leukemia in the context
of bone marrow transplantation. Localized RT is applied
in many lymphomas to optimize local disease control
and cure; palliative RT is extremely useful in multiple
myeloma and lymphomas. RT is increasingly used to
control selected metastases. In short, RT both saves lives
and alleviates suffering associated with cancer.
Radiation Therapy Alone
RT as the sole therapy is used in the treatment of localized tumors, such as early-stage cancer of the larynx or
prostate; non-melanoma skin cancer; head and neck
cancers; and radiosensitive tumor types, such as seminoma and lymphomas (Hoppe and others 2012; Motzer
and others 2009). In more advanced disease stages, RT
is used before, during, or after surgery and is frequently
combined with chemotherapy, either as concurrent or
adjuvant treatment.
Prior to the development of sophisticated computerized treatment planning systems, RT was planned
using clinical information and conventional X-rays
(2D RT) for field placement verification. This approach
resulted in the use of large radiotherapy fields that
assured coverage of the tumor, but also resulted in
limiting toxicity. With the introduction of computerized
tomography (CT) scanners and computerized treatment
planning, fields were shaped (3D conformal radiation
therapy, 3D CRT) to correspond to the tumors; the use
of smaller fields resulted in less toxicity and the ability

240

Cancer

to escalate the radiation dose, with resulting improved
outcomes and reduced toxicity. Now 3D CRT is the
standard approach in most countries. However, in some
low-income countries, the introduction of basic 2D
radiotherapy would still save many lives and reduce suffering in thousands of patients with advanced cancers.
The use of high-dose RT has been limited by
the dose delivered to adjacent normal tissues, especially those areas with limited radiation tolerance,
called critical normal structures. Continued progress
in computerization of RT planning and delivery allows
shaping the radiation field to deposit higher doses to
tumors and further sparing the surrounding normal
tissues. These newer techniques—intensity modulated
radiation therapy (IMRT) and stereotactic RT—allow
a therapeutic dose of RT to be delivered in a few highdose treatments and result in a higher probability of
tumor eradication; they have been successfully applied
in the management of brain metastasis and lung,
bone, and paraspinal tumors. IMRT is being gradually
introduced in many centers and is the preferred treatment for cancers of the prostate, as well as, head and
neck, where it has been shown to improve outcomes
significantly.

Concurrent Chemotherapy and Radiation Therapy
The use of concurrent chemotherapy and RT has significantly improved tumor eradication and survival in
several cancers. It may improve local control, result in
organ preservation, and eradicate distant microscopic
metastases. This combination therapy has proven beneficial in treating cancers of the lung, cervix, head and
neck, vulva, and anal canal (Benson and others 2012;
Chen and others 2013; Glynne-Jones and Renehan 2012;
Gregoire and others 2010; Koh and others 2013; Petrelli
and others 2014).

Radiation Therapy as Adjuvant Treatment
RT is commonly used as adjuvant treatment following
surgery, especially in the case of incomplete resection.
Postoperative radiation is commonly used in cancers
of the head and neck, rectum, breast, and lung, as well
as soft tissue sarcomas (Gunderson and Tepper 2012).
RT is also used after chemotherapy as the mainstay of
treatment when chemotherapy alone was not expected
to result in cure, such as for locally advanced breast
cancer or bladder cancer, or as adjuvant treatment to
potentially curative chemotherapy, such as for Hodgkin
and non-Hodgkin lymphomas.

Radiation Therapy in Metastatic Disease
RT is beneficial in providing palliation to patients with
metastatic disease. It is highly effective in controlling
bleeding and pain, as well as the symptoms resulting from compression of the nerves, spinal cord, or
airways. The use of RT for pain relief is particularly
valuable; a single moderate dose (8–10 Gy) achieves
significant pain relief in 60–80 percent of patients.
This benefit is of particular importance in LMICs,
where many patients present with advanced and
metastatic disease.

several days, or high-dose rate brachytherapy, where the
single dose of radiation is delivered within minutes.
Radioisotope therapy may be applied in the radiotherapy department or in the nuclear medicine department. The most common application of radioisotope
therapy is in the treatment of thyroid cancer using
radioactive iodine or in the palliation of pain from bone
metastasis using a radioactive isotope of strontium.
Less common indications employ a conjugated radioisotope such as lutetium (177Lu) DOTA-TATE to target
somatostatin-expressing neuroendocrine tumors.

DELIVERING RADIATION THERAPY

Facilities
RT is delivered in a specially designed facility that
contains specialized equipment for imaging, treatment
planning, and radiation delivery. Modern RT departments are designed to optimize patient flow through the
process and contain the following elements:

RT is delivered in three ways:
• External beam radiation therapy: applied externally
through directed beams of radiation to treat the cancer deep within the body.
• Brachytherapy: applied through the insertion of
radiation-emitting sources directly within the tumor
or adjacent body cavity.
• Radioisotope therapy: applied through the systemic
injection of a radioisotope that has been designed to
target disease.
Externally applied radiation beams can be produced
by several approaches: radioactive sources, such as
cobalt-60, that emit gamma rays; high-energy X-rays
or photons produced by linear accelerators; or particle
beams—electrons, protons, or heavier ions—accelerated
by other types of accelerators. These machines are
equipped with accessories that are able to shape dynamically the radiation beam according to beam direction,
as well as onboard imaging devices that can verify the
accuracy of treatment delivery. Linear accelerators are
currently the backbone of external beam RT; multiple
companies manufacture the technologies, offering a
range of high-energy X-rays (4–25 MV) to enable treatment of deep-seated tumors.
Brachytherapy involves either temporarily or permanently placing radiation-emitting sources directly
within tissues or body cavities. Permanent sources
decay rapidly, depositing the dose and remaining in
the body; temporary placement uses higher-activity
sources that are electromechanically guided to tumors
within preplaced interstitial or intracavitary catheters.
The source and applicators are removed after delivery
of the prescribed dose of radiation. These removable
radiation sources can provide either low-dose rate brachytherapy, where the source remains in the tissues for

•
•
•
•
•

Waiting areas
Examination rooms
Imaging suites with simulators/CT-simulators
Computer planning workrooms
Shielded treatment rooms for linear accelerators or
60
Co treatment units
• Shielded high-dose rate brachytherapy suites.

Additional support space is required for a physics
testing laboratory, equipment storage, and dedicated
environmentally controlled computer server rooms.
External beam RT is delivered using machines that
produce high-energy X-ray or electron beams. The
two main types of photon beams are 60Co machines
or X-ray-generating linear accelerators. Cobalt units
contain radioactive cobalt sources in the head of the
unit that emit photons with a mean energy of 1.25 MeV.
The source is constantly emitting and requires constant radiation protection; it decays gradually and
requires replacement every three to five years. Linear
accelerators use electric power to generate an electron
beam that is accelerated to produce a high-energy
photon beam. Linear accelerators require a stable
power supply for reliable operation. Both units have
collimators and filters to shape the radiation beam,
including multileaf collimators that allow motorized
shaping and/or modulation of the beam shape and
intensity during treatment delivery, thereby producing more conformal irradiation of the target tissues
while minimizing normal tissue exposure. In the past
10 years, X-ray and CT imaging capabilities have been

Radiation Therapy for Cancer

241

added to these machines to allow therapists to guide
the placement of the radiation with increased precision and accuracy.
Personnel
RT requires a specially trained team of professionals
that includes radiation oncologists to prescribe the dose;
medical physicists, trained to commission and maintain
the equipment and develop treatment plans; radiation
technologists or therapists to operate the treatment
units; and nurses experienced in managing patients
undergoing therapy. Biomedical engineers and computer or information technology experts complement
the team.
Once a decision to treat a patient has been made,
the team develops a treatment plan and proceeds with
delivery. The plan is based on accepted clinical guidelines
that describe the indications for RT; the target tissues to
be irradiated; the dose and fractionation prescriptions;
support for patients during treatment; and management
of patients after treatment, including acute and late
complications of treatment.
The safe and effective management of the RT system
requires a high level of communication and coordination of the processes and systems employed in the
prescription, design, and delivery of radiation. Local,
national, and international bodies provide regulations
and guidelines for radiation safety, dose calibration, and
quality assurance of devices, clinical practice, and monitoring of compliance.
Process
The process refers to all the steps from the decision to
treat a patient with radiation to the completion of the
course of radiation treatment.
• Prescription. The first step is completion of the radiation prescription, which indicates the exact part of
the body to be treated, as well as the dose/fractionation schedule, including the total radiation dose to
be delivered in how many fractions, at what intervals,
and in what overall time period.
• Planning. The second step is initiation of the planning process. Patients are positioned on an X-ray
imaging machine that simulates the geometry of
the treatment machine, or in more modern settings,
on a specially adapted CT scanner (CT simulator).
A desired position is determined (supine, prone, arms
up or by the side of the body); if needed, the patient
is immobilized with a specifically designed device to
secure the reproducibility of the position. The set-up

242

Cancer

information is documented in the RT chart or electronic medical record. Images of the part of the body
to be treated are obtained and stored.
• Treatment plan. Once the set-up and imaging are
complete, the radiation oncologist outlines the tissues
that must be irradiated on images and a radiation
technologist/dosimetrist or a medical physicist develops the treatment plan, using specialized planning
software that models the placement of radiation
beams and the dose contributed by each beam to
ensure that the prescribed dose is delivered to the
disease, while the dose to other tissues is minimized,
especially critical and particularly sensitive organs.
The individualized treatment plan is independently
verified, and the total dose is delivered through a
series of treatments (fractions) in a prearranged
schedule of sessions, usually daily over several weeks,
as specified in the prescription.
• Treatment delivery. Once the treatment plan is developed by a medical physicist and dosimetrist and
reviewed and approved by a radiation oncologist, the
treatment can begin. In each session, the patient is
positioned exactly as during the simulation. After verifying the prescription, treatment plan, and patient’s
position, the radiation dose is delivered. Treatments
are frequently given five days per week; in curative
settings, they may continue for four to six weeks.
Daily treatments are commonly delivered during a
session lasting 10–20 minutes.
In specific circumstances, RT is applied in a shorter
schedule consisting of one to three high-dose fractions.
These hypofractionated treatments can be applied with
generous margins for symptom relief for palliation rather
than local disease control. Alternatively, they can be
applied for curative intent, using high-precision (also
called stereotactic) methods, wherein the targeted volume
is very small and surrounding normal tissues are avoided.
During each session, specific verification steps are
taken before the dose is applied. During the course of
RT, the patient is monitored daily by technologists and at
least weekly by a physician; patients with acute side effects
receive supportive care, as needed. The radiation records
are kept for decades and made available for review in case
further RT or other interventions, such as surgery, are
planned for the previously irradiated part of the body.
Safe and Effective Operation
The staff processes and equipment need to be well managed to ensure safe and effective care that adheres to
best practices and evidence-based medicine. Specially
trained and certified personnel are essential for safe

and effective treatments, as well as safe operation of
the facility. The medical specialization requires a residency in radiation oncology to learn evidence-based
practice, radiation biology, and the principles of
radiation physics. Typically, an experienced radiation
oncologist oversees the operations of the RT department. The technological and treatment design activities are supported by specially trained physicists, called
medical physicists, with a degree in physics and additional training to acquire the specific skills required
to practice RT. Trained technologists interact with
patients and operate the treatment machines to deliver
the radiation doses. Dedicated education programs
have been developed to train these staff members in a
range of topics, including patient care, technology, and
radiation physics.
The operational team of the department has several
key responsibilities:
• Ensuring that the radiation systems are safe for
patients, the public, and staff members
• Ensuring that the radiation equipment is appropriately calibrated, tested, and maintained
• Ensuring that the each patient receives appropriate
care through peer review of the treatment plan and
independent checks of the calculations
• Monitoring and responding to errors or variations in
the delivery of care.
Depending on the local, national, and international
context, these activities may need to comply with
regulations.

systems that work to maximize the therapeutic ratio for
each patient. This evolution has resulted in significant
increases in the complexity of the treatment, which is
characterized by hundreds of megabytes of treatment
data and detailed quality control activities to ensure that
the prescription is applied not only accurately, but also
appropriately for each patient. In the interest of reducing costs and standardizing interventions, the field is
developing automated methods that allow high-quality
treatment plans to be designed in a few minutes. These
approaches promise to “bury the complexity” of the
current RT process, while still providing a high degree of
safety and personalization (Jaffray 2012).
The adoption of expert systems and machine learning
methods allows the treatment team to design and deliver
highly personalized RT (Purdie and others 2014). This
degree of automation provides a valuable form of peer
review that is inexpensive and can learn from experts
around the world by drawing on the clinical expertise
that has gone into large databases of existing treatment plans. The emergence of cloud-based treatment
planning and peer review is likely to fuse with modern
telemedicine approaches to create more efficient delivery
and learning platforms. An additional advantage of these
cost-saving methods is that they require a standardization in the nomenclature used to describe the treatment
intent and treatment record—a benefit that is highly
synergistic with the adoption of medical and bioinformatics efforts that promise to advance clinical practice
(Lambin and others 2013).

EQUITABLE ACCESS TO RADIATION THERAPY
Integration into Cancer Centers
RT departments collaborate closely with departments
of pathology and laboratory medicine, diagnostic imaging, surgery or surgical oncology, medical oncology,
and palliative care to ensure that treatment plans are
created based on correct diagnosis, full assessment of
disease extent (stage), and the medical condition of the
patient. Modern clinical practice ensures the physical
and operational infrastructure is in place to allow multidisciplinary cancer care. This infrastructure may include
multidisciplinary clinics and conferences where the
management of the patient is discussed with all appropriate experts—for example, oncologists, pathologists,
and radiologists—and the amalgamation of medical
records to facilitate communication and coordination
of care.
RT has evolved from the direct application of a single
beam of ionizing radiation to a cancerous lesion to imageguided, computer-optimized, robotically controlled

The World Health Organization recommends that all
countries develop and implement a population-based
cancer control plan. These plans are based on the information provided by cancer registries and include plans
for prevention; screening and early detection; timely
access to high-quality treatment, including surgery,
radiotherapy, and chemotherapy; and palliative and
supportive care.
Planning RT resource provision requires detailed
knowledge of the patterns of cancer, including different disease entities and distribution by stage. National
cancer plans should define the number of departments
and treatment machines that are appropriate for the
current and projected cancer burden. The distribution
of cancer facilities needs to consider not only the burden,
but also the geographic distribution of the population to
facilitate access.
Requisite elements of effective RT include medical and professional education, training programs for

Radiation Therapy for Cancer

243

support staff, and ongoing refreshment of equipment
and infrastructure. Specific elements that need attention
include the following:
• Medical education system. The training of radiation
oncologists, medical physicists, and radiation therapists is a critical element. Without this foundation,
shortages of professionals will lead to long waiting
lists, treatment delays, and compromised outcomes. In
addition, the lack of local training programs prevents
the establishment of a stable supply of staff to operate
the facilities. This lack is not only a challenge during
initiation of a program; it will persist as cancer services
are ramped up to reach the level of appropriate use.
• Regulatory structure. The presence of external
accreditation and regulation frameworks helps to
standardize the operation of RT departments and
secure high-quality practice. Establishing these
frameworks can be particularly challenging in
resource-constrained economies, where infrastructure is limited and political stability is an issue.
• Societal infrastructure. Limitations in access to a reliable supply of electric power, climate control, service
infrastructure, and complex procurement settings
affected by such factors as political instability and
transportation are problematic.
Innovative approaches need to be pursued to
address the numerous challenges that impede capacity

building. These innovations need to come from the
technological, educational, operational, and clinical
practice domains to avoid unnecessary suffering and
loss of human life.
Efforts to Address the Equity Gap
Ample evidence indicates severe gaps in access to RT
in large areas of the world. The International Atomic
Energy Agency (IAEA) maintains a directory of all RT
facilities (http://www-naweb.iaea.org/nahu/dirac/).
Significant inequity exists in access to RT across the
world. Map 14.1 shows one descriptor. By comparison,
access rates in high-income countries would correspond to approximately 100,000 people served by one
radiation treatment machine.
IAEA has brought attention to the lack of adequate RT resources for several decades. Comprehensive
reviews of the resources in Europe, Latin America and
the Caribbean, and Sub-Saharan Africa describe the
limitations in centers, equipment, and staff. One publication on cancer in Sub-Saharan Africa stated that 29
of 52 countries have no RT facilities; those that have
facilities face severe shortages. Less than 10 percent of
the population in the region has access (Zubizarreta and
others 2015).
The barriers to the implementation of RT are
numerous. They include perceptions that it is expensive, complex, and unlikely to succeed because of the

Map 14.1 Number of People Served by One Radiotherapy Unit
IBRD 41687 | JULY 2015

Number of People Served by
One Radiotherapy Unit
Data from International Atomic
Energy Agency – DIRAC database, 07/2013

Below 500,000
500,000–1 million
1–2 million
2–5 million
Over 5 million
No unit
No data

Source: Based on data from the Directory of Radiotherapy Centres (DIRAC) database of radiation therapy equipment, International Atomic Energy Agency,
Vienna, http://www-naweb.iaea.org/nahu/dirac/.

244

Cancer

shortage of qualified personnel and funding. With many
competing demands for cancer control activities, there
is a risk that the appropriate investment in RT may not
be made, leaving countries and patients to wrestle with
dysfunctional cancer services.
IAEA has provided technical assistance, training and
education, and financing for equipment. Unfortunately,
these efforts have not resolved the severe limitations
in access. The IAEA Programme of Action for Cancer
Therapy, established in 2004 (http://cancer.iaea.org/),
organized a large number of missions to assess the
readiness of a country to develop new RT facilities. These
missions assess all aspects of cancer control, since the
potential benefit offered by RT can be realized only in
the presence of adequate diagnostic facilities, surgery,
chemotherapy, and supportive and palliative care. IAEA
can advise governments on the optimal ways to proceed,
but the implementation depends on the political will
and resources devoted to cancer control.
Effective cancer planning has improved access in
a number of areas, including Brazil; Ireland; Ontario,
Canada; and Poland (Chalubinska-Fendler and others
2014). Overall, however, such progress is lacking in
LMICs, and international partnerships and assistance
are needed to accelerate progress to close the access
gap. The U.S.-based AMPATH Program is building a
new cancer center in Eldoret, Kenya, and has included
plans to implement RT as soon as possible (http://
www. ampathkenya.org/our-programs/primary-care
-chronic-diseases/oncology/).
In Latin America and the Caribbean, a unique
network of national cancer institutes has embarked on
an initiative to improve the quality of RT in the region
(http://www2.rinc-unasur.org/wps/wcm/connect/rinc
/site/home). The Network of National Cancer Institutions
of Latin America (RINC) initiative draws together
18 countries to organize a regional community of best
practices; exchange information and knowledge; identify needs, opportunities, and common interests; foster
coordination among member countries; and promote
the commitment of every country’s corresponding levels
of government, with emphasis on the availability of the
financial, human, and legislative resources necessary for
the development of cancer control.
Ongoing efforts in India and Turkey offer promise, but to date fall short of addressing the limited
access to effective RT for their populations (Banerjee,
Mahantshetty, and Shrivastava 2014; Goksel and
others 2011).
Although ample data describe the benefits of RT
for cancer control, the cost of equipment and development of skills seem an overwhelming challenge. This
does not need to be the case; any return begins with

an investment. Real effort needs to be put into calculating the true cost and the resultant benefits of RT so
that decision makers can make informed choices. Such
approaches have been applied in advancing the global
HIV/AIDS effort and are being pursued by the Union
for International Cancer Control Global Task Force on
Radiotherapy for Cancer Control (http://www.gtfrcc
.org). Such approaches are the key to articulating the
importance and value of financial investments in cancer control. Moreover, these approaches immediately
lead to the development of novel financing schemes to
overcome the reluctance to commit the funds for the
capital investment required to improve access globally
(chapter 17 in this volume [Knaul and others 2015]).

CONCLUSIONS
Cancer is projected to become the number one cause of
death across the globe in the next 20 years. The evidence
demonstrates that more than 40 percent of patients
with cancer would benefit from RT; the lack of access
will compromise the care of millions of people suffering
from cancer if not addressed through immediate action.
The global community has been working hard to ensure
quality through standardization in RT practices and
provide guidance in the establishment of new treatment capacity (IAEA 2008). It is now critical that RT
be acknowledged as an essential element of an effective
cancer control plan—and that the critical equipment,
operations, and educational investments be provided
to ensure that RT is in place to respond to the growing
cancer burden.

NOTE
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income per capita
for 2013:

• Low-income countries (LICs): US$1,045 or less
• Middle-income countries are subdivided:
a) Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
b) Upper-middle-income (UMICs):
US$4,126–US$12,745
• High-income countries (HICs): US$12,746 or more.

REFERENCES
Abdel-Wahab, M., J. M. Bourque, Y. Pynda, J. Izewska, D. Van
der Merwe, and others. 2013. “Status of Radiotherapy
Resources in Africa: An International Atomic Energy
Agency Analysis.” The Lancet Oncology 14 (4): e168–75.
doi:10.1016/s1470-2045(12)70532-6.

Radiation Therapy for Cancer

245

Banerjee, S., U. Mahantshetty, and S. Shrivastava. 2014.
“Brachytherapy in India: A Long Road Ahead.” Journal of
Contemporary Brachytherapy 6 (3): 331–35.
Barton, M. B., M. Frommer, and J. Shafiq. 2006. “Role of
Radiotherapy in Cancer Control in Low-Income and
Middle-Income Countries.” The Lancet Oncology 7 (7):
584–95. doi:10.1016/s1470-2045(06)70759-8.
Barton, M. B., S. Jacob, J. Shafiq, K. Wong, S. R. Thompson, and
others. 2014. “Estimating the Demand for Radiotherapy
from the Evidence: A Review of Changes from 2003 to 2012.”
Radiotherapy & Oncology 112 (1): 140–44. doi:10.1016/j
.radonc.2014.03.024. Epub May 12.
Benson, A. B., 3rd, J. P. Arnoletti, T. Bekaii-Saab, E. Chan,
Y. J. Chen, and others. 2012. “Anal Carcinoma, Version
2.2012: Featured Updates to the NCCN Guidelines.”
Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network
10 (4): 449–54.
Chalubinska-Fendler, J., W. Fendler, J. Luniewska-Bury,
W. Mlynarski, M. Spych, and others. 2014. “Tackling the
Turmoil of Transformation: Radiation Oncology in Poland.”
International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics
90 (3): 480–86. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2014.05.031.
Chen, R. C., W. U. Shipley, J. A. Efstathiou, and A. L. Zietman.
2013. “Trimodality Bladder Preservation Therapy for
Muscle-Invasive Bladder Cancer.” Journal of the National
Comprehensive Cancer Network 11 (8): 952–60.
Delaney, G., S. Jacob, and M. Barton. 2005a. “Estimating the
Optimal External-Beam Radiotherapy Utilization Rate
for Genitourinary Malignancies.” Cancer 103 (3): 462–73.
doi:10.1002/cncr.20789.
———. 2005b. “Estimation of an Optimal External Beam
Radiotherapy Utilization Rate for Head and Neck
Carcinoma.” Cancer 103 (11): 2216–27. doi:10.1002
/cncr.21084.
Engstrom, P. F., J. P. Arnoletti, A. B. Benson, 3rd, J. D. Berlin,
J. M. Berry, and others. 2010. “NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology: Anal Carcinoma.” Journal of the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network 8 (1): 106–20.
Fisher, B. J., L. C. Daugherty, J. P. Einck, G. Suneja, M. M. Shah,
and others. 2014. “Radiation Oncology in Africa: Improving
Access to Cancer Care on the African Continent.”
International Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics
89 (3): 458–61. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2013.12.032.
Glynne-Jones, R., and A. Renehan. 2012. “Current Treatment
of Anal Squamous Cell Carcinoma.” Hematology/Oncology
Clinics of North America 26 (6): 1315–50. doi:10.1016/j
.hoc.2012.08.011.
Goksel, F., O. Koc, N. Ozgul, M. Gultekin, M. Abacioglu, and
others. 2011. “Radiation Oncology Facilities in Turkey:
Current Status and Future Perspectives.” Asian Pacific
Journal of Cancer Prevention 12: 2157–62.
Gospodarowicz, M., J. Trypuc, A. D’Cruz, J. Khader, S. Omar,
and F. Knaul. 2015. “Cancer Services and the Comprehensive
Cancer Center.” In Disease Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 3, Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha,
R. Sankaranarayanan, and S. Horton. Washington, DC:
World Bank.

246

Cancer

Goss, P. E., B. L. Lee, T. Badovinac-Crnjevic, K. StrasserWeippl, Y. Chavarri-Guerra, and others. 2013. “Planning
Cancer Control in Latin America and the Caribbean.”
The Lancet Oncology 14 (5): 391–436. doi:10.1016
/s1470-2045(13)70048-2.
Gregoire, V., J. L. Lefebvre, L. Licitra, E. Felip, and Ehns-EsmoEstro Guidelines Working Group. 2010. “Squamous Cell
Carcinoma of the Head and Neck: EHNS-ESMO-ESTRO
Clinical Practice Guidelines for Diagnosis, Treatment and
Follow-Up.” Annals of Oncology 21 (Suppl. 5): v184–86.
doi:10.1093/annonc/mdq185.
Gunderson, L. L., and J. E. Tepper. 2012. Clinical Radiation
Oncology. 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Saunders; London:
Elsevier.
Hoppe, R. T., R. H. Advani, W. Z. Ai, R. F. Ambinder, P. Aoun,
and others. 2012. “Hodgkin Lymphoma, Version 2.2012:
Featured Updates to the NCCN Guidelines.” Journal of the
National Comprehensive Cancer Network 10 (5): 589–97.
IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency). 2008. Setting
Up a Radiotherapy Programme: Clinical, Medical Physics,
Radiation Protection and Safety Aspects. Vienna: IAEA.
Jaffray, D. A. 2012. “Image-Guided Radiotherapy: From
Current Concept to Future Perspectives.” Nature Reviews
Clinical Oncology 9 (12): 688–99. doi:10.1038/nrclinonc
.2012.194.
Jaffray, D. A., and M. Gospodarowicz. 2014. “Bringing
Global Access to Radiation Therapy: Time for a Change
in Approach.” International Journal of Radiation
Oncology, Biology, Physics 89 (3): 446–47. doi:10.1016/j
.ijrobp.2014.05.019.
Knaul, F., S. Horton, P. Yerramilli, H. Gelband, and R. Atun.
2015. “Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings.” In
Disease Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 3, Cancer,
edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan, and
S. Horton. Washington, DC: World Bank.
Koh, W. J., B. E. Greer, N. R. Abu-Rustum, S. M. Apte,
S. M. Campos, and others. 2013. “Cervical Cancer.” Journal
of the National Comprehensive Cancer Network 11 (3):
320–43.
Lambin, P., R. G. Van Stiphout, M. H. Starmans, E. RiosVelazquez, G. Nalbantov, and others. 2013. “Predicting
Outcomes in Radiation Oncology: Multifactorial Decision
Support Systems.” Nature Reviews Clinical Oncology 10 (1):
27–40. doi:10.1038/nrclinonc.2012.196.
Motzer, R. J., N. Agarwal, C. Beard, G. B. Bolger, B. Boston,
and others. 2009. “NCCN Clinical Practice Guidelines
in Oncology: Testicular Cancer.” Journal of the National
Comprehensive Cancer Network 7 (6): 672–93.
Petrelli, F., A. De Stefani, F. Raspagliesi, D. Lorusso,
and S. Barni. 2014. “Radiotherapy with Concurrent
Cisplatin-Based Doublet or Weekly Cisplatin for Cervical
Cancer: A Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis.”
Gynecologic Oncology 134 (1): 166–71. doi:10.1016/j.
ygyno.2014.04.049.
Pfister, D. G., K. K. Ang, D. M. Brizel, B. A. Burtness,
P. M. Busse, and others. 2013. “Head and Neck Cancers,
Version 2.2013. Featured Updates to the NCCN

Guidelines.” Journal of the National Comprehensive Cancer
Network 11 (8): 917–23.
Purdie, T. G., R. E. Dinniwell, A. Fyles, and M. B. Sharpe.
2014. “Automation and Intensity Modulated Radiation
Therapy for Individualized High-Quality Tangent Breast
Treatment Plans.” International Journal of Radiation
Oncology, Biology, Physics 90 (3): 688–95. doi:10.1016/j
.ijrobp.2014.06.056.
Ramos, M., S. Benavente, and J. Giralt. 2010. “Management of
Squamous Cell Carcinoma of the Head and Neck: Updated
European Treatment Recommendations.” Expert Review of
Anticancer Therapy 10 (3): 339–44. doi:10.1586/era.10.6.
Rodin, D., D. Jaffray, R. Atun, F. M. Knaul, M. Gospodarowicz,
and others. 2014. “The Need to Expand Global Access
to Radiotherapy.” The Lancet Oncology 15 (4): 378–80.
doi:10.1016/s1470-2045(14)70121-4.
Rosenblatt, E., J. Izewska, Y. Anacak, Y. Pynda, P. Scalliet,
and others. 2013. “Radiotherapy Capacity in European
Countries: An Analysis of the Directory of Radiotherapy

Centres (DIRAC) Database.” The Lancet Oncology 14 (2):
e79–86. doi:10.1016/s1470-2045(12)70556-9.
Souchon, R., F. Wenz, F. Sedlmayer, W. Budach, J. Dunst,
and others. 2009. “DEGRO Practice Guidelines for
Palliative Radiotherapy of Metastatic Breast Cancer: Bone
Metastases and Metastatic Spinal Cord Compression
(MSCC).” Strahlentherapie und Onkologie 185 (7): 417–24.
doi:10.1007/s00066-009-2044-2.
Tyldesley, S., G. Delaney, F. Foroudi, L. Barbera, M. Kerba,
and others. 2011. “Estimating the Need for Radiotherapy
for Patients with Prostate, Breast, and Lung Cancers:
Verification of Model Estimates of Need with Radiotherapy
Utilization Data from British Columbia.” International
Journal of Radiation Oncology, Biology, Physics 79 (5):
1507–15. doi:10.1016/j.ijrobp.2009.12.070.
Zubizarreta, E. H., E. Fidarova, B. Healy, and E. Rosenblatt.
2015. “Need for Radiotherapy in Low and Middle Income
Countries: The Silent Crisis Continues.” Clinical Oncology
27 (2): 107–14. doi:10.1016/j.clon.2014.10.006.

Radiation Therapy for Cancer

247

Chapter

15

Need for National Commitments to
Cancer Research to Guide Public
Health Investment and Practice
Edward L. Trimble, Preetha Rajaraman, Ann Chao,
Thomas Gross, Carol Levin, You-Lin Qiao, Timothy Rebbeck,
Lisa Stevens, and Fang-hui Zhao

INTRODUCTION
This chapter is addressed primarily to potential funders
of health research at the national, provincial, and state
levels. Health research in general, and cancer research
in particular, is not a luxury reserved for high-income
countries (HICs); it is a necessity for all countries across
the income spectrum. The extent and depth of that
research may vary by a country’s financial situation,
and the topics may vary by a country’s specific burden
of cancers and associated risk factors. Nevertheless,
a comprehensive health research plan is foundational to
the ability to allocate resources efficiently and effectively,
develop human capacity and infrastructure, and identify
the appropriate technologies and medicines for health
and health services delivery. In short, robust research is
essential to building evidence-based cancer prevention
and control programs.
In recognition of the foundational nature of
research, ministers and representatives of ministries
of health, science and technology, agriculture, education, foreign affairs, and international cooperation
from 53 countries convened in 2008 in Mali at the
Bamako Global Ministerial Forum on Research in
Health. Of the 53 participating countries, 38 were lowand middle-income countries (LMICs), according to

World Bank criteria. The group issued its Call to Action,
which articulates the rationale for supporting research
to inform public policy, and sent the Call to Action
to the World Health Organization (WHO 2008). The
Call to Action recommends that national governments
allocate at least 2 percent of the budgets of ministries of
health to research and that international development
agencies invest at least 5 percent of development assistance funds earmarked for the health sector in research.
Box 15.1 highlights many of the principles applicable to
cancer research.
Subsequent white papers and policy statements have
made clear the importance of research on noncommunicable diseases and cancer to guide public policy and
public investment (See Annotated Select Bibliography).

STAKEHOLDERS AND THEIR KNOWLEDGE
NEEDS IN CANCER RESEARCH
There are many stakeholders in cancer prevention and
control, including researchers, ministers of health, physicians, other providers, and patients.
The most important stakeholders are the individuals
with cancer, their families, patient advocates, and those
at risk of cancer. Ministers of health and their colleagues

Corresponding author: Edward L. Trimble, MD, MPH, trimblet@nih.org

249

Box 15.1

Highlights of the 2008 Bamako Call to
Action for Research on Health
• Adopting comprehensive approaches. Ensure
that research and innovations are interdisciplinary and intersectoral; engage the public
sector, private sector, and civil society associations in collaborations.
• Setting priorities. Develop the global
research agenda in light of national and
regional priorities, and encourage national
governments to make the development of
policies for health research and innovation
a priority.
• Building capacity. Improve capacity at all
relevant levels to foster research and technology transfer, improve the education and
training of researchers, integrate research
into health systems, and establish systems to
evaluate the impact of research.
• Improving equity. Make greater equity a key
element in the process.
Source: WHO 2008.

are also important stakeholders, as are physicians and
other members of the health care team who provide
care on a daily basis. Additional ministries at the
national and state levels often play roles (albeit some of
them minor), including the ministries responsible for
finance, education, science and technology, agriculture,
energy, customs, and foreign affairs. Universities and
other academic units, as well as hospitals and clinics
in the public and private sectors, have major roles in
research.
Nongovernmental organizations are also crucial
partners in fostering cancer research. Specialists from
many disciplines of research and health are involved,
including physicians, nurses, pharmacists, psychologists,
social workers, epidemiologists, biostatisticians, basic
and translational research scientists, information technologists, and data managers.
The needs of national stakeholders should guide cancer research in each country. One way to recognize those
needs is by determining what ministries of health need
to know (box 15.2) and what patients and their doctors
need to know (box 15.3).

250

Cancer

RESEARCH PRIORITIES IN CANCER
Health Surveillance and Cancer Surveillance
Making cancer surveillance an integral part of public
health surveillance, which collects information on other
risk factors and diseases, will greatly facilitate efforts
to improve cancer outcomes. More than 20 percent
of cancers in LMICs, for example, are associated
with chronic viral, bacterial, or helminthic infection
(De Martel and others 2012). Comprehensive cancer
surveillance, accordingly, requires surveillance of relevant preventive practices, including vaccinations, that
can influence the incidence and prevalence of infections
linked to cancer. Similarly, cancer and other noncommunicable diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, share
a number of common risk factors, such as tobacco use,
obesity, poor diet, physical inactivity, alcohol consumption, and environmental pollution. Surveillance for these
common risk factors is critical to effective cancer control.
The Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation
(2011) has developed a framework for integrating surveillance systems across health information sources
to help decision makers allocate resources and evaluate interventions. The World Health Organization also
collects data on a variety of health indicators across
diseases through its Global Health Observatory (WHO
2013). Table 15.1 sets out the range of health surveillance systems with relevance for cancer prevention and
control. Few countries can afford to collect such health
surveillance data on 100 percent of their populations.
Nonetheless, through judicious use of cross-sectional
surveys in representative populations, cohort studies,
and disease and death registries, health policy makers
can draft, implement, evaluate, and modify cancer
control plans.
A national system that assigns unique individual
identifying numbers or biometrics can be used routinely
at all health system encounters and vital registrations
of births and deaths to strengthen national health surveillance systems. Such a national identification system
can facilitate the linkage of medical records, including
records from clinic visits and hospitalizations, immunization records, pathology reports, operative notes,
health insurance reimbursement information, and death
registration.
Cancer Registries and Pathologic Diagnosis
Cancer Registries The most basic public health oncology question is what is the burden of cancer in a city,
a state, a country, or a region? The answer begins with
pathology laboratories, where biological specimens for
individuals—including blood tests, diagnostic biopsies,

Box 15.2

What Do Ministries of Health Need to Know?
The answers to the following questions are relevant
to ministries of health from low-, middle-, and
high-income countries.
What is the burden of cancer in the country?
• How many cancers are diagnosed each year?
• How many people die from cancer?
• Which are the most common cancers?
• Which geographic regions and populations bear
the greatest cancer burden?
• How does the burden of cancer compare with
that of other diseases?
• What are the risk factors for cancer in the
country?

and surgical specimens—are evaluated. To these data are
added cancers diagnosed on the basis of imaging studies,
as well as cancers diagnosed on the basis of physical
signs and patient symptoms. The data for individuals
diagnosed with cancer can then be added up to give a
picture of the overall cancer burden. Cancer registry data
can provide descriptive and trend information about the
burden of cancer in a population and enable the formation of hypotheses about etiology that can be tested
in analytic studies. Cancer registry data also inform the
need for cancer diagnosis and treatment facilities and
allow the evaluation of cancer control interventions in
a population.
Obtaining such data at the country level is difficult
and expensive. The traditional approach has been to
start small, with one hospital, then expand to a city
or county, then to a state or province, and finally to
other representative or high-risk populations of interest.
Population-based registries may cover a representative
portion of the geographic region of interest from which
the larger (for example, countrywide) cancer burden can
be estimated. Furthermore, population-based registries
can be used to evaluate community health interventions
in the region.
In the United States, for example, the National
Cancer Institute’s Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End
Results (SEER) Program began to capture information
on cancer incidence from 14 percent of the country’s population in 1973. The scope was subsequently
expanded to track additional areas with low-income

What resources are now in place for cancer control?
• What can be done in the context of the existing
health care system to prevent cancer and other
common diseases?
• What can be done to screen for and treat cancer?
• How can we help cancer survivors return to being
productive members of society?
• What palliative care can we provide?
What could we do by redeploying existing
resources? What else should we be doing and what
will it cost?
• What are the “best buys” for the country in the
context of currently available health resources?

Box 15.3

What Do Patients and Doctors Need to
Know?
The answers to these questions are relevant for
patients, families, and health care providers in
low-, middle-, and high-income countries.
• What type of cancer does the patient have?
• What is the extent or stage of the cancer?
• What are the options for treating the cancer
and its symptoms?
• How can the patient gain access to appropriate and affordable cancer therapy, treatment
of symptoms, survivorship counseling, and
supportive care?
• If the treatment works as hoped and the
patient is cured of cancer, what steps are
needed to help the patient reintegrate into
family and work life?
• If the cancer is too advanced for curative
therapy or if treatment does not cure the
patient, will the patient benefit from palliative care, including pain control?
• How can the patient best gain access to palliative care?

Need for National Commitments to Cancer Research to Guide Public Health Investment and Practice

251

Table 15.1 Health Surveillance Systems for Noncommunicable Diseases and Cancer Control Planning
Infections
• Incidence and prevalence of infections linked to cancer, such as hepatitis B virus (HBV) and C, human papillomavirus (HPV), human
immunodeficiency virus (HIV), human T-lymphotropic virus-1, Epstein-Barr virus, human herpesvirus, Helicobacter pylori, and liver flukes
• Uptake of prophylactic HBV and HPV vaccines
Common risk factors for noncommunicable diseases
• Tobacco use (smoked and oral), including exposure to secondhand smoke
• Lack of proper diets, such as those with more fruits and vegetables and whole grains; exposure to known carcinogens, such as nitrates and
high-temperature beverages
• Alcohol intake
• Obesity
• Low activity level
Availability of, access to, and uptake of cancer screening
• Preinvasive cervical cancer
• Breast cancer
• Colon cancer
Cancer registries
• Type and stage of cancer annotated with demographic data
• Primary treatment and cancer outcome
Death registries
• Deaths occurring due to cancer or concurrent disease after diagnosis of cancer

and minority populations; as of 2013, it included
approximately 28 percent of the population. The SEER
Program collects high-quality, individual-level data on
patient demographics, primary tumor site, morphology, stage at diagnosis, first course of treatment, and
follow-up for vital status (Howlader and others 2013).
A complementary program established through the U.S.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in 1992 has
expanded cancer registries to cover 96 percent of the U.S.
population.
Role of Laboratories and Anatomic Pathology Accuracy
in histopathologic diagnosis of tumor specimens from
surgery or biopsy is required to make the correct diagnosis for any one person’s cancer and help that person and
health care providers make the appropriate treatment
decision. In addition, accuracy in histopathologic diagnosis is also required to ensure the accuracy of cancer
incidence data in cancer registries. Biological specimens
must be processed promptly, shortly after removal from
the human body. Pathology laboratories require trained
histotechnicians and cytotechnicians, as well as functioning instrumentation and a reliable supply chain for
the equipment needed to process specimens, such as
formalin, glass slides, and diagnostic reagents. Trained

252

Cancer

pathologists must be available to review the processed
material, whether onsite, at central laboratories, or from
remote sites via telepathology.
When a person is diagnosed with cancer, it is
important to determine the aggressiveness of the specific cancer and whether the cancer has spread from the
original site of origin to other parts of the body. This
additional information is used to assign a stage to the
cancer, which generally ranges from stage I (the earliest
stage, which in many cases can be cured with standard
therapy) to stage IV (the most advanced stage, which is
most difficult to treat effectively). The ability to assign
a stage to newly diagnosed cases requires linking the
pathology report to clinical data. Without data on the
extent of the disease or stage, it is not possible to provide
appropriate treatment or determine the success of interventions intended to diagnose cancer at earlier stages
when the cancer is more successfully treated.
Biobanking Biobanks and biological resource centers
constitute key components of cancer research. To
understand the biological basis of cancer; to develop
biomarkers for cancer risk, early detection, and prognosis; and to determine the most appropriate cancer treatment based on precise diagnosis of tumor

characteristics, it is necessary to have access to clinically
annotated biologic specimens of cancer and normal
tissue (Vaught, Henderson, and Compton 2012). Until
recently, some analyses required special preparation of
specimens, such as fresh frozen tissue. More recent developments in molecular pathology permit many studies to
be done on formalin-fixed, paraffin-embedded tissue.
To make progress in cancer research as quickly
as possible, it is important to be able to facilitate the
collection and analysis of such specimens. Some specimens may need to be shipped to global or regional core
laboratories for analysis using standardized protocols.
In other cases, the primary analysis may be done in
the country of origin, with a small number of samples
exchanged among countries for standardization and
quality control of the laboratory techniques. National
or state regulations that prohibit any shipment of
specimens outside the country or region of origin may
preclude efficient analysis of those specimens and delay
progress in research needed for cancer control.
Given the increasing need to pool data and biospecimens from consortia of studies around the
world to achieve adequate sample size and statistical power, countries with rigid rules for data- and
biospecimen-sharing will be at a disadvantage in the
ability to participate in cutting-edge cancer research
(NRC 2011; Thun, Hoover, and Hunter 2012). Although
it is clear that regulations must be in place for the appropriate use of all samples when shared outside national
boundaries, facilitating processes for the timely sharing
of biological specimens will enhance research for all.
Linking Death Registration Systems to Cancer
Registration Systems
Functioning national, regional, or sample-area death
registration systems are critical to a country’s ability to
monitor its burden of all diseases. In areas covered by
cancer registries, accurate death registration information
may serve as an important source of cancer-case finding.
In general, cancer registrars routinely search hospital
medical records for the initial diagnosis and pathology
report of medically certified cancer deaths.
Linking information on individuals diagnosed with
cancer to death registries also greatly facilitates the
computation of rates of cancer survival (for example,
case-fatality rates) by tumor site and stage of disease,
which otherwise would require expensive and timeconsuming active follow-up of individuals diagnosed
with cancer. As noted, the use of unique individual
patient identifiers can help to link the diagnosis of
cancer with patient follow-up and, ultimately, the death
of that individual. In the absence of cancer registries,
the cancer burden of a country can be estimated by the

cancer mortality rate, if cause-of-death data are available
(Boyle and Levin 2008; Jensen and others 1991).
A less costly and less precise alternative approach to
obtaining the medically certified cause of death is that
of the verbal autopsy, in which trained health workers
interview the members of a household in which a death
has occurred about the symptoms of the deceased person
(Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation 2011).
Dikshit and others (2012) have reported the successful use
of the verbal autopsy in the Million Death Study in India
to estimate mortality from cancer and other diseases.
Cancer Epidemiology
The application of sound epidemiologic methods is
indispensable in cancer research. Experimental and
observational studies have yielded much of the current
knowledge about causation, prevention, and intervention; epidemiologic studies conducted using cancer
registry data have made significant contributions to the
understanding of rates and trends. Cancer registries provide descriptive data that reveal important patterns and
trends in the burden of cancer in defined populations.
Registry data help to generate hypotheses that guide
epidemiologic investigations that can identify potential causative factors, rule out false associations, define
the nature of the dose-response relationship, identify
co-factors and, in some cases, identify explanations for
late-stage diagnosis. Increasingly, epidemiology studies
incorporate molecular biology in their design to help
better define outcome (cancer subtypes at a given site
can vary greatly) and exposure with relevant biomarkers
and to identify genetic and other molecular risk factors.
Case-Control Studies
A great deal of knowledge on cancer epidemiology is
generated by case-control studies, which identify cancer
cases using cancer registries or hospitals and other
points of care and sample controls from the source
population of cases. These epidemiologic investigations
may require rapid case finding by study personnel,
in-depth interviews of cases, and controls by trained
interviewers to assess exposure information, environmental sampling, and collection and analysis of biospecimens at core laboratories. Case-control studies are
efficient and generally less costly than cohort studies,
particularly in the study of rare outcomes (Rothman,
Greenland, and Lash 2008). Challenges include the
potential for biases, such as differential recall, and the
challenge of measuring exposures or assessing biomarkers of environmental exposure before the time of cancer
diagnosis, thereby making it difficult to assess temporality (Wild 2009).

Need for National Commitments to Cancer Research to Guide Public Health Investment and Practice

253

Cohort Studies
Cohort studies can overcome some of the limitations
of case-control and cross-sectional study designs by
enabling the measurement of exposures at the time of
cohort enrollment, often years or decades before cancer
development and diagnosis (Breslow and Day 1987;
Rothman and Greenland 2008). Exposure assessment
can be determined before the onset of disease and
thereby limit the potential for recall bias and other types
of bias inherent to case-control studies.
Cohort studies also contribute to health surveillance
by providing the opportunity to obtain repeated measures of multiple exposures and potential confounding
factors and to measure changes in these factors over
time. Cohort studies enable estimation of the incidence of outcomes of interest, including infections,
premalignant lesions, cancers, and comorbid conditions.
Follow-up of cohorts requires long-term commitment,
for supporting the study infrastructure and team, as
well as for building and maintaining trust between the
research team and the participants in the cohort. Recent
developments in information technology, including the
increased uptake of mobile telephones and Internet
access, have facilitated the development and maintenance of study cohort enrollment and follow-up.
A cohort may be used to study multiple health
endpoints and multiple exposures; new endpoints may
be added over time, and data and biospecimens from
multiple cohorts can be pooled to obtain greater
statistical power. Thun and others (2013), for example, pooled data from seven cohorts to analyze the
long-term impact of cigarette smoking in the United
States. Another example is the 2004 formation of the
International Childhood Cancer Cohort Consortium
to assemble birth and child cohorts around the world to

prospectively collect information on early life exposures
and childhood cancers. This effort resulted from the
recognition that single studies lacked the statistical
power to study childhood cancers that are rare. It also
provided evidence that pre-conception and in utero
exposures may be important determinants of subsequent risk of childhood and adult cancers (Brown and
others 2007).
Some adult cohorts that have made seminal contributions to cancer epidemiology include the following:
• The prospective cohort study of British doctors (Doll
and Hill 1954)
• The American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention
Studies (Calle and others 2002; Hammond 1966;
Thun and others 1997)
• The United Kingdom Million Women Study (Million
Women Study Collaborative Group 1999)
• The Japan Life Span Study (Sakata and others 2012)
• The Nurses’ Health Study (Colditz, Manson, and
Hankinson 1997) (box 15.4)
More recently formed cohorts in LMICs include the
following:
• The China Kadoorie Biobank, which includes 500,000
adults from urban and rural areas in China (Chen
and others 2011) (box 15.5)
• A separate cohort of 220,000 men in China (Chen
and others 2012)
• A cohort of 150,000 women and men in Mexico City
(Kuri-Morales and others 2009)
• The Chennai Prospective Study of 500,000 adults in
Tamil Nadu, India (Gajalakshmi and others 2007;
Gajalakshmi, Whitlock, and Peto 2012)

Box 15.4

Cohort Study: The Nurses’ Health Studies
The Nurses’ Health Study (2014a) comprises two
cohorts of registered female nurses that enrolled
more than 115,000 nurses in the United States. The
first cohort began in 1976 and the second in 1989.
These long-term epidemiologic studies were originally designed to assess risk factors for two major
chronic diseases in women, namely, cancer and
cardiovascular disease. Due to the large sample size,
the extensive data available on each participant, and

254

Cancer

associated biological specimens, the investigators
have also been able to study risk factors for many
other chronic diseases, including diabetes mellitus,
stroke, osteoporosis, mental health, and connective
tissue disease. The Nurses’ Health Study coordinating center is recruiting a third cohort of 100,000
nurses. Participant registration and follow-up will
be conducted entirely via Internet communication
(Nurses’ Health Study 2014b).

Box 15.5

Cohort Study: The China Kadoorie Biobank
The China Kadoorie Biobank includes 500,000 adults
recruited between 2004 and 2008 from 10 regions in
China, urban and rural (Chen and others 2011). All
participants are being followed for hospital admissions, as well as cause-specific morbidity and mortality. Already, studies have been published on respiratory
disease, depression, anxiety, diabetes, cardiovascular disease, alcohol consumption, physical activity,
and obesity, and interactions among these factors
within the cohort (Bragg and others 2014; Chen
and others 2014; Du and others 2013; Lewington and
others 2012; Mezuk and others 2013; Millwood and
others 2013; Zhang and others 2013).
The studies have found, for example, that selfreported diabetes was associated with a doubling

Health Communications
Health communications contribute in a number of
critical areas needed in cancer research (National
Cancer Institute 2004). First is the need to communicate the importance of health research to
the media, policy makers, and the general public.
Without community recognition of the need for
health research, without appropriate levels of funding,
and without a regulatory framework that facilitates
the health research needed to guide public policy and
public investment in health, health research cannot
take place.
Second is the need to understand how best to communicate to individuals, families, and communities that
research findings support public health recommendations
and guidance. One clear example is how best to communicate the health risks associated with tobacco use, alcohol
abuse, and physical inactivity. Ideally, such communication should lead to changes in behavior that reduce the
risk of cancer and other chronic diseases. Other examples
are communication regarding recommended regimens
for approved vaccines that prevent chronic infections
associated with cancer, such as those for hepatitis B virus
(HBV) and human papillomavirus (HPV), and recommendations for routine cancer screening.
Third is the need to identify ways to help communities understand cancer. This includes understanding

of the odds of prevalent cardiovascular disease
(Bragg and others 2014); that only one in three
individuals with prior cardiovascular disease
was routinely treated with any proven secondary
preventive drugs (Chen and others 2014); that
drinking alcohol was positively correlated with
regular smoking, increased blood pressure, and
increased heart rate (Millwood and others 2013);
that major depression and generalized anxiety
disorder are associated with type 2 diabetes mellitus (Mezuk and others 2013); and that exhaled
carbon monoxide can be used as a biomarker
for assessing current smoking and exposure
to indoor household air pollution (Zhang and
others 2013).

that some cancers can be prevented, that some cancers
are amenable to screening, and that many cancers
can be treated successfully if diagnosed early. Such
education and communication may help to overcome
the stigma of cancer, particularly in settings where
cancers are typically diagnosed at late stages with poor
prognoses.
Different communication strategies may be needed
for different populations, based on language, levels
of literacy and health literacy, access to health care,
socioeconomic status, cultural sensitivities, and other
factors. The development and validation of effective
cancer-related health communication strategies is key to
developing and implementing research that can facilitate
cancer prevention and control.

Implementation Science
Effective means of implementing cancer prevention;
population-based screening; and timely and accurate
cancer diagnosis, treatment, and symptom management are needed to improve cancer control. The U.S.
National Cancer Institute has developed a website
(http://cancercontrolplanet.cancer.gov) with links to
effective cancer control interventions, including
a database of research-tested intervention programs
developed in partnership with the Substance Abuse

Need for National Commitments to Cancer Research to Guide Public Health Investment and Practice

255

Box 15.6
•

What Questions Can Implementation Science
Answer?

•

Implementation science can help obtain answers to the
following questions for cancer prevention and control:
•
• Which tobacco control programs are most effective for
specific populations?
• What are the most cost-effective ways to ensure that as
many children as possible are vaccinated for HBV and
HPV?
• What is the most effective way to screen for and treat
preinvasive HPV-related cervical neoplasia?
• What is the most effective way to screen for colon
cancer?
• What is the most effective way to provide palliative care,
including pain control?
• What are the most effective ways to ensure quality
control across the cancer spectrum, from screening to
treatment to survivorship care?

•

•

•
•

and Mental Health Services Administration (National
Cancer Institute 2013).
Different approaches may be needed for different
regions in the same country and between countries,
based on existing health resources, cultural norms, and
other factors. In some cases, task shifting of responsibilities from doctors to nurses, other health professionals,
and lay community health workers or from nurses to
community health workers may be required. The principles of implementation science can guide public health
interventions for cancer control and facilitate their routine evaluation and modification, as needed, to achieve
the goals (Madon and others 2007). Although more
research is needed in all the areas mentioned, much is
already known to be able to implement cancer control
strategies to reduce the burden of cancer (box 15.6).
Cancer Research Collaboration
National Level
To optimize country-level outcomes, national policy
makers will need to consider the essential elements of
and necessary conditions for health research that require
a comprehensive approach that includes the following:
• Achieving a consensus that health research
deserves the appropriate funding and strategies

256

Cancer

for implementation, as the Bamako Call to Action
advocates
Developing and implementing mechanisms for transparent and objective evaluation and prioritization of
clinical research studies
Establishing systems for ethical, regulatory, and
scientific reviews so that research can be conducted
in a timely manner and clinical studies can be completed expeditiously
Revising customs inspections and policies to remove
restrictions on the importation of drugs, devices, and
reagents for health research
Developing mechanisms and resources for the efficient and inexpensive acquisition of drugs, devices,
and reagents for health research
Providing financial support—possibly from national
governments, state governments, nongovernmental
organizations, or a combination—for the infrastructure for public clinical trials, including protocol
development, regulatory management, routine medical expenses of patients, data management, quality
assurance, biobanking, biostatistics, and informatics
Integrating clinical research into national health
systems
Integrating education about clinical research into
education and training of health care providers

Local Level
It is important to assist the institutional leadership at the
local level—whether hospital, clinic, or university—to
appreciate the importance of health research. Doctors,
nurses, pharmacists, and specialists from other relevant disciplines need protected time to conduct clinical research. Academic tracks could be established to
foster research and reward individuals for conducting
clinical research. In some cases, money could be earmarked to pay for the additional costs associated with
research. These costs may include additional imaging
studies or specimen processing that may not be required
for routine clinical care. The local study sites also need
the appropriate financial and technical resources for clinical research management, biobanking, and informatics.
Research Training
For research to have a significant impact on health,
governments in LMICs and HICs need to invest in
training future scientists, clinicians, public health professionals, and physician-scientists. Such investments in
training professionals in the range of relevant disciplines
and helping them to maintain and strengthen their
research skills require effective coordination that may
involve government ministries responsible for education,
health, science and technology, and human resources, as

well as academic institutions, hospitals, clinics, nongovernmental organizations, and professional societies.
Principles of health research can be integrated into
the core curriculums of schools of medicine, nursing,
public health, pharmacy, and allied health sciences, as
well as university programs for basic sciences and social
sciences. This integration will ensure that all individuals involved in research with relevance for health learn
about the conduct of health research and appreciate the
need for such research.
Biostatisticians are a critical component of the
research team, as are basic and translational research
scientists, social scientists, health economists, and health
communicators. There is a great need, particularly
among young scientists in low-resource settings, for
opportunities to participate in high-quality cancer
research and to have access to nurturing mentors,
whether local or remote.
Other allied areas in which training and mentorship
are critically needed are the ethical conduct of cancer
research, research subject protection, scientific writing
for preparation of research proposals and manuscripts,
and responsible study and financial management.
International Collaboration
International collaboration in cancer research spans
capacity building and joint research projects. There
are many examples of North-South and South-South
projects to build capacity in health and cancer research.
Institutional “twinning” has been particularly successful in this regard. Joint research projects can facilitate
training opportunities for investigators in LMICs. Two
recent reports from the Organisation for Economic
Co-operation and Development’s Global Science Forum
highlight the need for international collaboration in
clinical research to address many important health
questions (OECD 2011, 2013).
The facilitation of such collaboration requires an
effective national commitment to health research as
well as a commitment to facilitate international collaboration (Trimble and others 2009). International
research collaboration may require allowing specimens
to be shipped to a regional or global core laboratory, as
well as pooling relevant information in an international
database. Timely scientific and ethical review is critical for national studies, particularly for international
collaboration (Abrams and others 2013). International
partnerships in cancer research require the timely
recognition of scientific opportunities, available
resources and study conditions, strengths of research
partners, integrity, persistence, and commitment of all
partners in jointly overcoming barriers to accomplish
research objectives.

Industry Collaboration
Many aspects of cancer control, including prevention
with vaccines, screening, diagnosis, treatment, and
symptom management, require reliable drugs, devices,
and reagents. Many areas of cancer need better, more
effective, more accessible, and less costly drugs, devices,
and reagents. Partnering with industry will facilitate
the development and validation of novel products, as
well as help to ensure a reliable supply chain to bring
products shown to be beneficial to routine clinical practice. Once a product is developed and tested, it will be
important to work with industry partners to make the
product available and affordable on a population basis.
Such public-private partnering is an integral component
of developing and translating innovations in cancer
research to clinical care and public health.

CERVICAL CANCER: EXEMPLAR OF
INTEGRATED RESEARCH
Cervical cancer provides a sterling example of how
cancer research in virology, immunology, epidemiology,
clinical care, behavioral sciences, and implementation
science has led to effective cancer prevention and control. Much of this work occurred because of international collaborations that allowed appropriate sharing of
research material, data, and expertise.

Epidemiology and Biology
The link between chronic HPV infection and cervical
cancer was established by zur Hausen and colleagues in
the early 1990s, building on earlier experimental work that
strongly suggested the possibility that the two were linked
(Reid 1983; zur Hausen and de Villiers 1994). Muñoz
and others (2002) confirmed that HPV was responsible
for more than 99 percent of cervical cancers globally.
Epidemiologic studies have also permitted the identification of additional co-risk factors for cervical cancer,
including exposure to tobacco smoke, both firsthand and
secondhand, chronic immunosuppression, multiparity,
long-term use of oral contraceptives, and high-risk male
partners (Schiffman and Hildesheim 2006).

Development of Vaccines to Prevent HPV Infection
The identification of HPV as a necessary causative agent
led to the development of vaccines to prevent HPV
infection and cervical cancer. Two vaccines to prevent
HPV infection demonstrated efficacy and safety in phase
III and IV studies (Schiller, Castellsagué, and Garland
2012). Both agents have been widely approved by drug

Need for National Commitments to Cancer Research to Guide Public Health Investment and Practice

257

regulatory authorities, including the U.S. Food and Drug
Administration and the European Medicines Agency.
The rollout of these vaccines to prevent HPV infection
required a progression of clinical research studies, first
to confirm primary efficacy, then to validate in different
populations, followed by public health investigations
to determine how best to deliver and encourage uptake
of the new vaccines to prevent HPV infection and
cervical cancer (Program for Appropriate Technology in
Health 2012).
These investigations incorporated studies of messaging, including how best to communicate to parents
the health benefits that the new vaccine offers to their
daughters; studies comparing on-the-ground vaccine
delivery programs, such as school-based versus clinicbased HPV vaccination programs; and comparisons and
studies of different dosing schedules for HPV vaccines
(Galagan and others 2013; Lamontagne, Barge, and
others 2011; Lamontagne, Thiem, and others 2013).
Australia, which has a national reporting system for
HPV-associated warts in addition to a national registry
for vaccinations, has been able to document significant
decreases in HPV infection and genital warts among
teenagers and young adults following the widespread
introduction of the vaccine (Read and others 2011;
Tabizi and others 2012). Several second-generation vaccines to prevent HPV infection are under development,
with the goal of addressing the issue of type-restricted
protection and decreasing the cost of production.
HPV Diagnostics for Cervical Cancer Screening
Based on the understanding of the link between chronic
oncogenic HPV infection and cervical neoplasia, new
diagnostic tests have been developed to target the virus,
including evidence of active infection with high-risk

HPV types, as well as evidence of HPV integration.
DNA-based tests detect the presence or absence of the
HPV virus genome. DNA testing for high-risk HPV types
has a high sensitivity for the detection of high-grade
cervical intraepithelial neoplasia and cervical cancer
(Arbyn and others 2012). The great advantages are that
HPV detection assays are automated and objective and
have a greater reproducibility than cytology; as such, they
are a promising screening test in LMICs, which may lack
skilled personnel. Sankaranarayanan and others (2009)
found that a single round of testing for HPV was associated with a significant reduction in the risk of advanced
cervical cancer and death from cervical cancer among
rural women in India. In this study, which accrued
131,746 women ages 30–59 years in 52 villages, the other
two screening arms—cytologic testing and visual inspection of the cervix with acetic acid—did not demonstrate
significant reductions in the risk of advanced cervical
cancer and deaths from cervical cancer.
Unanswered Questions in HPV-Associated Neoplasia
and Cervical Cancer Control
Based on the body of research to date, as well as
the extensive programs for control of HPV-associated
neoplasia, many critical research questions remain
unanswered (Schiller and Lowy 2014) (box 15.7). These
questions span a variety of scientific areas, including the
following:
•
•
•
•
•
•

Behavioral sciences
Health communications
Health services research
Immunology
Implementation science
Prevention

Box 15.7

Ongoing Research Questions in HPV and Cervical Cancer Control
The tremendous progress in HPV and cervical
cancer control can be taken even further as these still
outstanding research questions are addressed. The
following cervical cancer research agenda provides
opportunities for scientists in all interested countries.
• Prevention, health services research, and immunology. How can the cost of the currently available

prophylactic HPV vaccine regimen be reduced?
Are one or two doses as effective as three? Will
additional booster doses be needed and when?
• Prevention, implementation science, and health
communications. What combination of feasibility
and affordability would convince policy makers in
LMICs to introduce and fund population-based
prophylactic HPV vaccination?
box continues next page

258

Cancer

Box 15.7 (continued)
• Health communications, prevention, behavioral
sciences, and implementation science. What are
the critical components in educational programs
for parents considering whether to permit their
daughters and sons to undergo prophylactic
HPV vaccination?
• Prevention, virology, and immunology. What is
needed to develop second-generation prophylactic HPV vaccines that provide protection against
infection from more HPV subtypes than included
in the first-generation HPV vaccines?
• Screening and virology. What is needed to develop
effective screening strategies for HPV-associated
neoplasia of the oropharynx and anus?
• Screening, health services research, and implementation science. What types of infrastructure, human resource capacity, and logistical
support are needed to scale up existing and
new cervical neoplasia screening and treatment services at multiple levels of the health
system to meet the needs of urban and rural
populations?
• Screening and virology. What is the feasibility
of developing inexpensive, highly sensitive,
and highly specific HPV-based tests to use as a
primary screen for cervical neoplasia and chronic
HPV infection in low-resource settings?
• Screening, health services research, and implementation science. How can population-based
screening for cervical neoplasia or chronic HPV
infection be more effectively integrated into
maternal-child health programs, programs

•
•
•
•

Screening
Symptom management
Treatment
Virology.

CONCLUSIONS: “BEST BUYS” FOR CANCER
RESEARCH
What are the “best buys” for cancer research in LMICs?
Where should ministers of health, ministers of science
and technology, and other funders of research begin?
• Robust health surveillance systems, including surveillance of cancer risk factors, cancer registries,

•

•

•

•

•

•

caring for HIV-positive individuals, well-woman
programs, and programs screening for other
noncommunicable diseases, such as diabetes,
hypertension, and breast cancer?
Health communications, screening, behavioral
sciences, and implementation science. What measures can be taken to ensure that no woman
found to have an abnormal screening result is lost
to follow-up?
Treatment. What can be done to improve current
ablative therapy for preinvasive cervical and anal
cancer?
Immunology and treatment. Can therapeutic
HPV immunization strategies be developed to
prevent the development of neoplasia in individuals already infected with HPV, as well as to
complement or replace ablative therapy for HPVassociated neoplasia?
Treatment and implementation science. How can
current therapy, including surgery, radiation,
chemoradiation, and neoadjuvant chemotherapy,
be improved for women with invasive cervical
cancer?
Treatment, behavioral sciences, and implementation science. How can the quality of life best
be maintained and enhanced in cervical cancer
survivors, including bowel, bladder, and sexual
function, as well as physical intimacy?
Symptom management, behavioral sciences, and
implementation science. How can palliative care
be delivered most effectively to women diagnosed
with late-stage or recurrent cervical cancer?

and cancer-associated deaths, are critical to effective
decision making for prevention and control, as well as
priorities in cancer research.
• Next is implementation science focused on how
to deliver interventions that have been shown to
be effective. Perhaps the most effective method of
cancer prevention is tobacco control. Countries at all
levels of income could sponsor research focused on
how best to reduce or eliminate use of tobacco. This
research should include public policy, public education, and smoking cessation initiatives.
• For LMICs burdened with liver cancer or cervical cancer, implementation science focused on expanding routine administration of HBV and HPV vaccinations is
appropriate. For countries at all levels of development,

Need for National Commitments to Cancer Research to Guide Public Health Investment and Practice

259

implementation science in effective methods to deliver
palliative care is critical. Educational and training programs for health care professionals and community
health workers would benefit from the inclusion of
the principles of health research. How best to educate
and retain health care workers at all levels is also an
appropriate area for research.
• Countries with the ability to conduct programs for
cancer screening, early diagnosis, and treatment
could expand implementation science research to
cover these areas, as well as tobacco control and
preventive vaccines. Timely topics for research
also include cost-effective strategies to screen for
cervical, colon, oral, esophageal, stomach, and skin
cancers; to evaluate breast masses; and to provide
potentially curative therapy for preinvasive and
invasive cancer.
• The next area for research, as national resources
permit, encompasses cancer epidemiology and biology.
Improved understanding of the risk and protective
factors for specific cancers, as well as their molecular
biology, is essential to design effective interventions for
prevention, screening, early diagnosis, and treatment.
For example, the epidemiology and biology of prostate
cancer is not sufficiently well understood to prevent it,
screen for it, or know how best to treat it. Similarly, the
ability to make progress on cancer control for many
cancers linked to chronic infection and inflammation
requires better elucidation of the salient biology, natural history, co-factors, and protective factors.

NOTE
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income per capita
for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries: US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries:
a) Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
b) Upper-middle-income: US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries: US$12,746 or more

REFERENCES
Abrams, J. S., M. M. Mooney, J. A. Zwiebel, E. L. Korn,
S. H. Friedman, and others. 2013. “Implementation of
Timeline Reforms Speeds Initiation of National Cancer
Institute–Sponsored Trials.” Journal of the National Cancer
Institute 105 (13): 954–59.
Arbyn, M., G. Ronco, A. Anttila, C. J. Meijer, M. Poljak, and
others. 2012. “Evidence Regarding Human Papillomavirus
Testing in Secondary Prevention of Cervical Cancer.”
Vaccine 30 (Suppl. 5): F88–99.

260

Cancer

Boyle, P., and B. Levin, eds. 2008. World Cancer Report. Lyon:
IARC Press.
Bragg, F., L. Li, M. Smith, Y. Guo, Y. Chen, and others. 2014.
“Associations of Blood Glucose and Prevalent Diabetes with
Risk of Cardiovascular Disease in 500,000 Adult Chinese:
The China Kadoorie Biobank.” Diabetic Medicine 31 (5):
540–51.
Breslow, N. E., and N. E. Day. 1987. Statistical Methods in
Cancer Research, Volume II: The Design and Analysis of
Cohort Studies. Scientific Publications 82. Lyon: IARC Press.
Brown, R. C., T. Dwyer, C. Kasten, D. Krotoski, Z. Li, and others.
2007. “International Childhood Cancer Cohort Consortium
(I4C).” International Journal of Epidemiology 36 (4): 724–30.
Calle, E. E., C. Rodriguez, E. J. Jacobs, L. Almon, A. Chao,
and others. 2002. “The American Cancer Society Cancer
Prevention Study II Nutrition Cohort: Rationale, Study
Design, and Baseline Characteristics.” Cancer 94 (9):
2490–501.
Chen, Y., L. Li, Q. Zhang, R. Clarke, J. Chen, and others. 2014.
“Use of Drug Treatment for Secondary Prevention of
Cardiovascular Diseases in Urban and Rural Communities
of China: China Kadoorie Biobank Study of 0.5 Million
People.” International Journal of Cardiology 172 (1): 88–95.
Chen, Z., J. Chen, R. Collins, Y. Guo, R. Peto, and others.
2011. “China Kadoorie Biobank of 0.5 Million People:
Survey Methods, Baseline Characteristics and Long-Term
Follow-Up.” International Journal of Epidemiology 40 (6):
1652–66.
Chen, Z., G. Yang, A. Offer, M. Zhou, M. Smith, and others.
2012. “Body Mass and Mortality in China: A 15-Year
Prospective Study of 220,000 Men.” International Journal of
Epidemiology 41 (2): 472–81.
Colditz, G. A., J. E. Manson, and S. E. Hankinson. 1997.
“The Nurses’ Health Study: 20-Year Contribution to the
Understanding of Health among Women.” Journal of
Women’s Health 6 (1): 49–62.
De Martel, C., J. Ferlay, S. Franceschi, J. Vignat, F. Bray, and
others. 2012. “Global Burden of Cancers Attributable to
Infections in 2008: A Review and Synthetic Analysis.” The
Lancet Oncology 13 (6): 607–15.
Dikshit, R., P. C. Gupta, C. Ramsundarahettige, V. Gajalakshmi,
L. Aleksandrowicz, and others. 2012. “Cancer Mortality in
India: A Nationally Representative Survey.” The Lancet 379
(9828): 1807–16.
Doll, R., and A. B. Hill. 1954. “The Mortality of Doctors in
Relation to Their Smoking Habits: A Preliminary Report.”
British Medical Journal 1 (4877): 1451–55.
Du, H., D. Bennett, L. Li, G. Whitlock, Y. Guo, and others.
2013. “Physical Activity and Sedentary Leisure Time and
Their Associations with BMI, Waist Circumference, and
Percentage Body Fat in 0.5 Million Adults: The China
Kadoorie Biobank Study.” American Journal of Clinical
Nutrition 97 (3): 487–96.
Gajalakshmi, V., R. Peto, V. C. Kanimozhi, G. Whitlock,
and D. Veeramani. 2007. “Cohort Profile: The Chennai
Prospective Study of Mortality among 500,000 Adults
in Tamil Nadu, South India.” International Journal of
Epidemiology 36 (6): 1190–95.

Gajalakshmi, V., G. Whitlock, and R. Peto. 2012. “Social
Inequalities, Tobacco Chewing, and Cancer Mortality in
South India: A Case-Control Analysis of 2,580 Cancer
Deaths among Non-Smoking Non-Drinkers.” Cancer
Causes and Control 23 (Suppl. 1): 91–98.
Galagan, S. R., P. Paul, L. Menezes, and D. S. LaMontagne. 2013.
“Influences on Parental Acceptance of HPV Vaccination in
Demonstration Projects in Uganda and Vietnam.” Vaccine
31 (30): 3072–78.
Hammond, E. C. 1966. “Smoking in Relation to the Death
Rates of One Million Men and Women.” National Cancer
Institute Monographs 19: 127–204.
Howlader, N., A. M. Noone, M. Krapcho, J. Garshell, N. Neyman,
and others, eds. 2013. “SEER Cancer Statistics Review, 1975–
2010.” National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, MD, based on
November 2012 SEER data submission, posted to the SEER
website, April 2013, http://seer.cancer.gov/csr/1975_2010.
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation. 2011. Verbal
Autopsy Series. http://www.healthmetricsandevaluation
.org/publications/verbal-autopsy-series.
Jensen, O. M., D. M. Parkin, R. MacLennan, C. S. Muir, and
R. G. Skeet, eds. 1991. Cancer Registration: Principles and
Methods. Scientific Publications 95. Lyon: IARC Press.
Kuri-Morales, P., J. Emberson, J. Alegre-Diaz, R. Tapia-Conyer,
R. Collins, and others. 2009. “The Prevalence of Chronic
Diseases and Major Disease Risk Factors at Different Ages
among 150,000 Women Living in Mexico City: CrossSectional Analyses of a Prospective Study.” BioMed Central
Public Health 9: 9.
Lamontagne, D. S., S. Barge, N. T. Le, E. Mugisha, M. E. Penny,
and others. 2011. “Human Papillomavirus Vaccine Delivery
Strategies That Achieved High Coverage in Low- and
Middle-Income Countries.” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 89 (11): 821–30B.
Lamontagne, D. S., V. D. Thiem, V. M. Huong, Y. Tang,
K. M. Neuzil, and others. 2013. “Immunogenicity of
Quadrivalent HPV Vaccine among Girls 11 to 13 Years
of Age Vaccinated Using Alternative Dosing Schedules:
Results 29 to 32 Months after Third Dose.” Journal of
Infectious Diseases 208 (8): 1325–34.
Lewington S., L. Li, P. Sherliker, Y. Guo, I. Millwood, and
others. 2012. “Seasonal Variation in Blood Pressure and
Its Relationship with Outdoor Temperature in 10 Diverse
Regions of China: The China Kadoorie Biobank.” Journal of
Hypertension 30 (7): 1383–91.
Madon, T., K. J. Hofman, L. Kupfer, and R. I. Glass. 2007.
“Public Health: Implementation Science.” Science 318
(5857): 1728–29.
Mezuk, B., Y. Chen, C. Yu, Y. Guo, Z. Bian, and others.
2013. “Depression, Anxiety, and Prevalent Diabetes in the
Chinese Population: Findings from the China Kadoorie
Biobank of 0.5 Million People.” Journal of Psychosomatic
Research 75 (6): 511–17.
Million Women Study Collaborative Group. 1999. “The
Million Women Study: Design and Characteristics of the
Study Population.” Breast Cancer Research 1 (1): 73–80.
Millwood, I. Y., L. Li, M. Smith, Y. Guo, L. Yang, and others.
2013. “Alcohol Consumption in 0.5 Million People from 10

Diverse Regions of China: Prevalence, Patterns, and SocioDemographic and Health-Related Correlates.” International
Journal of Epidemiology 42 (3): 816–27.
Muñoz, N., S. Franceschi, C. Bosetti, V. Moreno, R. Hererro, and
others. 2002. “Role of Parity and Human Papillomavirus in
Cervical Cancer: The IARC Multicentric Case-Control
Study.” The Lancet 359 (9312): 1093–101.
National Cancer Institute. 2004. Making Health Communications
Programs Work. Bethesda, MD: National Institutes of
Health, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
———. 2013. Cancer Control P.L.A.N.E.T. http://
cancercontrolplanet.cancer.gov
NRC (National Research Council). 2011. Toward Precision
Medicine: Building a Knowledge Network for Biomedical
Research and a New Taxonomy of Disease. Committee on
a Framework for Developing a New Taxonomy of Disease.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Nurses’ Health Study. 2014a. The Nurses’ Health Study. http://
www.channing.harvard.edu/nhs.
———. 2014b. Nurses’ Health Study 3. http://www.nhs3.org.
OECD (Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development). 2011. “Facilitating International
Cooperation in Non-Commercial Clinical Trials.” Global
Science Forum, OECD. http://www.oecd.org/science
/sci-tech/49344626.pdf.
———. 2013. “Recommendation on the Governance of
Clinical Trials.” http://www.oecd.org/sti/sci-tech/oecd
-recommendation-governance-of-clinical-trials.pdf.
Program for Appropriate Technology in Health. 2012.
“Evaluating HPV Vaccination Pilots: Practical Experience
from PATH.” Program for Appropriate Technology in Health,
Seattle. http://www.rho.org/HPV-evaluating-pilots.htm.
Read, T. R., J. S. Hocking, M. Y. Chen, B. Donovan, and
C. S. Bradshaw. 2011. “The Near Disappearance of Genital
Warts in Young Women 4 Years after Commencing a
National Human Papillomavirus (HPV) Vaccination
Programme.” Sexually Transmitted Infections 87 (7):
544–47.
Reid, R. 1983. “Genital Warts and Cervical Cancer: Is
Human Papillomavirus Infection the Trigger to Cervical
Carcinogenesis?” Gynecologic Oncology 15 (2): 239–52.
Rothman, D. J., and S. Greenland. 2008. “Cohort Studies.”
In Modern Epidemiology, edited by K. J. Rothman,
S. Greenland, and T. Lash, 3rd edition, 100–10. Philadelphia,
PA: Lippincott Williams and Wilkins.
Rothman, K. J., S. Greenland, and T. L. Lash. 2008. “CaseControl Studies.” In Modern Epidemiology, edited by
K. J. Rothman, S. Greenland, and T. Lash, 3rd edition,
111–27. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott Williams and
Wilkins.
Sakata, R., P. McGale, E. J. Grant, K. Ozasa, R. Peto, and
others. 2012. “Impact of Smoking on Mortality and Life
Expectancy in Japanese Smokers: A Prospective Cohort
Study.” British Medical Journal 345: e7093.
Sankaranarayanan R., B. M. Nene, S. S. Shastri, K. Jayant,
R. Muwonge, and others. 2009. “HPV Screening for Cervical
Cancer in Rural India.” New England Journal of Medicine
360 (14): 1385–94.

Need for National Commitments to Cancer Research to Guide Public Health Investment and Practice

261

Schiffman, M. H., and A. Hildesheim. 2006. “Cervical
Cancer.” In Cancer Epidemiology and Prevention, edited
by D. Schottenfeld and J. F. Fraumeni, 1044–67. New York:
Oxford University Press.
Schiller, J. T., X. Castellsagué, and S. M. Garland. 2012.
“A Review of Clinical Trials of Human Papillomavirus
Prophylactic Vaccines.” Vaccine 30 (Suppl. 5): F123–38.
Schiller, J. T., and D. R. Lowy. 2014. “Virus Infection and
Human Cancer: An Overview.” Recent Results in Cancer
Research 193: 1–10.
Tabizi, S. N., J. M. Brotherton, J. M. Kaldor, S. R. Skinner,
E. Cummins, and others. 2012. “Fall in Human
Papillomavirus Prevalence Following a National Vaccination
Program.” Journal of Infectious Diseases 206 (11): 1645–51.
Thun, M. J., B. D. Carter, D. Feskanich, N. D. Freedman,
R. Prentice, and others. 2013. “50-Year Trends in SmokingRelated Mortality in the United States.” New England
Journal of Medicine 368 (4): 351–64.
Thun, M. J., R. N. Hoover, and D. J. Hunter. 2012. “Bigger,
Better, Sooner: Scaling Up for Success.” Cancer Epidemiology,
Biomarkers, and Prevention 21 (4): 571–75.
Thun, M. J., C. A. Lally, J. T. Flannery, E. E. Calle, W. D. Flanders,
and others. 1997. “Cigarette Smoking and Changes in the
Histopathology of Lung Cancer.” Journal of the National
Cancer Institute 89 (21): 1580–86.
Trimble, E. L., J. S. Abrams, R. M. Meyer, F. Calvo, E. Cazap,
and others. 2009. “Improving Cancer Outcomes through
International Collaboration in Academic Cancer Treatment
Trials.” Journal of Clinical Oncology 27 (30): 5109–14.
Vaught, J. B., M. K. Henderson, and C. C. Compton. 2012.
“Biospecimens and Biorepositories: From Afterthought to
Science.” Cancer Epidemiology, Biomarkers, and Prevention
21 (2): 253–55.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2008. “The Bamako Call
to Action for Research on Health.” WHO, Geneva. http://
www.who.int/rpc/news/BAMAKOCALLTOACTIONFinal
Nov24.pdf.
———. 2013. “Global Health Observatory.” WHO, Geneva.
http://www.who.int/gho/database/en/.
Wild, C. P. 2009. “Environmental Exposure Measurement in
Cancer Epidemiology.” Mutagenesis 24 (2): 117–25.
Zhang, Q., L. Li, M. Smith, Y. Guo, G. Whitlock, and others.
2013. “Exhaled Carbon Monoxide and Its Associations with
Smoking, Indoor Air Pollution and Chronic Respiratory
Diseases among 512,000 Chinese Adults.” International
Journal of Epidemiology 42 (5): 1464–75.
zur Hausen, H., and E. M. de Villiers. 1994. “Human
Papillomaviruses.” Annual Review of Microbiology 48: 427–47.

ANNOTATED SELECT BIBLIOGRAPHY
Farmer, P., J. Frenk, F. M. Knaul, L. N. Shulman, G. Alleyne,
L. Armstrong, and others. 2010. “Expansion of Cancer
Care and Control in Countries of Low and Middle Income:
A Call to Action.” The Lancet 376: 1186–93.

262

Cancer

This policy paper includes the need for implementation science research in low- and middle-income
countries to guide effective cancer preventions and
control in these settings.
Hunter, D. J., and K. S. Reddy. 2013. “Noncommunicable
Diseases.” New England Journal of Medicine 369: 1336–43.
The authors emphasize the need for global research
efforts to inform the prevention, detection, and treatment of noncommunicable diseases.
Institute of Medicine. 2011. “The National Cancer Policy
Summit: Opportunities and Challenges in Cancer Research
and Care.” National Academies Press, Washington, DC.
———. 2013a. Delivering High-Quality Cancer Care: Charting
a New Course for a System in Crisis. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press.
———. 2013b. “Delivering Affordable Cancer Care in the 21st
Century-Workshop Summary.” National Academies Press,
Washington, DC.
Together these three reports from the Institute of
Medicine outline the essential elements for effective
cancer research, as well as priorities for implementation
science to guide cancer control.
Lozano, R., M. Naghvai, K. Foreman, S. Lim, K. Shibuya,
V. Aboyans, and others. 2012. “Global and Regional
Mortality from 235 Causes of Death for 20 Age Groups
in 1990 and 2010: A Systematic Analysis for the Global
Burden of Disease Study 2010.” The Lancet 380: 2095–28.
This analysis makes clear the burden of cancer, compared with other causes of death.
Varmus, H., and H. S. Kumar. 2013. “Addressing the Growing
International Challenge of Cancer: A Multi-National
Perspective.” Science Translational Medicine 175.
The authors summarize the recommendations, including priorities for research, of representatives of institutions and organizations that fund and perform cancer
research in 15 countries that include more than half of
the world’s population.
WHO (World Health Organization). 1996. “Ad Hoc Committee
on Health Research Relating to Future Intervention
Options: Investing in Health Research and Development.”
Document TDR/Gen/96.1, WHO, Geneva.
This document was developed to assist decision making
by government, industry, and other investors on the
allocation of funds for health research and development.
———. 2013. Global Action Plan for the Prevention and Control
Of Non-Communicable Diseases. 2013–2020. ISBN 978 92 4
150623 6.
This action provides guidance on public health priorities and thus key implementation science issues related
to cancer prevention and control, developed as part
of follow-up to the 2011 United Nations High-Level
Meeting on Non-communicable Diseases.
Wild, C. P. 2012. “The Role of Cancer Research in
Noncommunicable Disease Control 2012.” Journal of the
National Cancer Institute 104 (14): 5109–14.

Chapter

16

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries:
An Economic Overview
Susan Horton and Cindy L. Gauvreau

INTRODUCTION
Health care is informed first and foremost by scientific
and medical understanding of how to treat and prevent
disease. Economics can, however, provide useful insights
to inform policy in the design and implementation
of the systems to provide health care, as well as in the
process of prioritizing interventions to make the best
use of scarce resources. Treating a single cancer patient
may require the coordination of many inputs and may
cost tens or even hundreds of thousands of dollars
in high-income countries (HICs). Ongoing population cancer screening and early detection also require
considerable coordination, including treatment for cases
detected, and costs. Finally, although knowledge of
cancer prevention is inadequate, prevention can be a
costly endeavor—as demonstrated by the large sums
spent on behavior change promotion (such as smoking cessation) or on vaccines to prevent cancer, such
as against human papilloma virus to prevent cervical
cancer and hepatitis B virus to prevent liver cancer—and
economics can be informative.
The second section of this chapter reviews how
the availability of resources for cancer care varies by
economic status, using the World Bank’s categories of
low-income countries (LICs), middle-income countries (MICs) (comprising lower-middle-income countries and upper-middle-income countries), and HICs.
At the same time, economy is not destiny. Countries

at the same level of economic development differ
because other factors intervene. Urbanization affects
the patterns of cancer and the ability to access care.
Local champions, governmental political leadership,
and international partnerships can all loosen the constraints of local economic resources. Conversely, some
countries are underachievers in cancer care despite
their income level, perhaps because of leadership
failures.
The third section reviews the cost-effectiveness of
interventions for cancer care, where care is here defined
to include prevention. The cost-effectiveness of interventions has been well studied in HICs, but much less
so in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs). This
section summarizes the literature on the economics of
cancer care in LMICs; the section also draws on the
literature from HICs, particularly for cancer treatment,
in areas where reliable studies for LMICs are particularly
scarce. It may be possible to make inferences for one
country using results from another country; the validity
of these inferences rises with the extent of the similarities in the two countries. Where possible, we separate
out the findings for high-income economies in Asia,
since they are likely to be more relevant for LMICs in
this region than the results from North America or
Western Europe.
We use the resource grouping suggested by Anderson
and others (see chapter 3) for the Breast Health Global

Corresponding author: Susan Horton, PhD, sehorton@uwaterloo.ca

263

Initiative and apply this to other cancers. In this
framework, facility resource environments fall into four
categories of resource availability:
•
•
•
•

Basic
Limited
Enhanced
Maximal

These categories are correlated with the World Bank
income groupings. LICs have a preponderance of Basic
facilities, rural areas in MICs have more facilities with
Limited capabilities, urban areas in MICs have more
facilities with Enhanced capabilities, and much of the
population in HICs has access to facilities with Maximal
capabilities. The implications for the availability of
resources specific to cancer care are described. This
section requires some interpolation on the authors’ part
because of the paucity of previous work in the area and
is subject to further validation by experts.
The fourth and final section contains conclusions,
consisting of summary recommendations of packages of cancer care appropriate for each of the four
resource environments, as well as priority areas where
further research is required. The appropriateness of a
package is defined by feasibility (those resources can
be expected to exist or could exist with reasonable
investments) and by likely cost-effectiveness (within
the limits of available data). Although there are internationally validated resource-specific care guidelines
for breast cancer (the Breast Health Global Initiative),
no such guidelines are available as yet for other cancers.
The packages presented here have been validated in
consultation with the chapter authors of this volume
(chapters 3 through 8), but need to be further refined
by expert consultation.

AVAILABILITY OF CANCER CARE
RESOURCES ACROSS COUNTRIES
Patterns of cancer vary across countries of different
income levels (chapter 2 in this volume). Countries also
have different capabilities for cancer care, depending on
resource availability. Some of the resources for cancer
care are specific to individual cancers, for example, the
availability of a specific drug or test kit. Other resources
are specific to cancer in general, for example, radiation
therapy or the need for specialized medical personnel
trained in oncology. Still others are not specific to cancer but affect many kinds of medical care, including
imaging facilities, surgical facilities, pathology, and
laboratory medicine services. Finally, there are broader

264

Cancer

factors that affect health care generally, such as the
availability of health insurance (public, private, or
mixed) and general administrative capability for the
requisite health care systems.
LMICs generally have inadequate resources for health
care, which conditions what is available specifically for
cancer care and, hence, mortality rates. From a policy
perspective, it is important to identify the priorities for
investment to make maximum health gains with the
available budgetary resources. We use cost-effectiveness
analysis to provide some guidelines, for areas where
additional recurrent expenditures would benefit care
(such as buying additional drugs) and for areas where
large investments in fixed costs are required (such as
setting up a specialized cancer hospital).
Some resource constraints can be overcome. Even
low-income Sub-Saharan African countries can acquire
and maintain radiation facilities, although ensuring
access for patients from remote rural areas may be
difficult. It is more challenging, however, to advocate
treatments that require sophisticated pathology and
laboratory facilities. Such facilities are important for
a wide range of medical conditions, for which cancer
forms only a small percent, and they require a much
larger effort and investment to set up and maintain,
particularly the training of skilled personnel. It may
be completely infeasible in such countries to consider
certain types of organized screening if no insurance
system is in place to finance the screening costs, much
less the treatment of the cases diagnosed.
Table 16.1 provides examples of availability, by
income grouping, of some specific resources relevant
to cancer treatment; each resource is discussed in turn.
Information about the availability of radiation therapy and cancer registries is available elsewhere (and
not included in the table); quantitative data on the
availability of skilled personnel and laboratories are not
easily obtained.
Surgery
Surgery is the cornerstone of treatment for many
solid tumors. The level of surgical skill and associated
resources required varies by type of cancer. Surgery for
earlier stage colon cancer or mastectomy for early-stage
breast cancer can be undertaken at reasonably wellequipped first-level hospitals. More sophisticated
facilities and skills are required for such procedures as
breast-conserving surgery and rectal surgery. Surgery
for certain precancerous conditions may be possible at
lower-level facilities; cryotherapy for cervical cancer, for
example, can be undertaken in clinics. Table 16.1 shows
that HICs have more than 12 times as many operating

Table 16.1 Resource Availability Affecting Cancer Care by Country Income Groups
Low-income
countries

Lower-middleincome countries

Upper-middleincome countries

High-income
countries

Surgical facilities per 1,000 population,a 2007–08

1.3

4.7

9.9

16.4

Out-of-pocket health expenditure (% of health
expenditures),b 2011

48.1

52.8

33.3

13.7

Availability of tamoxifen (% of countries where it
is generally available, according to knowledgeable
respondents),c,d 2010

34

53

80

85

Availability of oral morphine (% of countries where
it is generally available, according to knowledgeable
respondents),c,d 2010

27

28

57

81

1,036 and below

1,036–4,087

4,087–12,615

12,616 and above

Resource

Income range,e 2012 (US$)

a. Funk and others 2010.
b. World Bank 2013.
c. WHO 2012.
d. The question asked whether the medication was generally available in the public sector.
e. World Bank 2013.

theaters per capita as LICs (chapter 13 in this volume).
Countries may face difficult choices as to how much
surgical capacity to utilize for palliation for patients for
whom there is no chance of cure, compared with those
for whom there is the possibility of cure.
Radiotherapy
Radiotherapy is a key to improving survival for certain
cancers. In Afghanistan, Iraq, and Sub-Saharan Africa,
25 countries lack any radiation unit; other countries have
one unit per five million people (IAEA 2013). Clearly,
the radiation unit alone is not the only constraint;
sufficient trained staff members are also required. Not
surprisingly, greater availability of radiotherapy is correlated with country income. Low-income countries
can provide radiotherapy, but the main issue is that the
capacity in many countries is completely insufficient to
meet the need. Typically, facilities need, at a minimum,
the Limited level of resources to be able to provide
radiotherapy.
Medications
Pharmaceuticals of various kinds are vital to improve
cancer survival rates, yet country income is associated
with the availability of these agents. Access to tamoxifen for breast cancer is limited in LICs, as is access to
pain control using oral morphine (table 16.1, using
survey data from WHO 2012). The case is similar for
chemotherapy agents, although no quantitative data
were readily available. The budget constraints in LICs

and rural areas of MICs often mean that these areas can
only afford the lowest cost (usually older, off-patent)
regimens. In addition to the cost of the agents, chemotherapy requires multiple visits to a health facility
each month to obtain the supporting blood chemistry.
Facilities need the Limited level of resources to support
chemotherapy, effectively restricting its use to MICs
and HICs.
Some effective but modest-cost cancer medications
should be available, even from Basic level facilities.
As long as a single laboratory test can be undertaken
per patient to determine hormone receptor status,
tamoxifen can be used, even in rural areas and LICs.
Pain control medication, including morphine, should
be available in all environments as long as access can
be controlled.
Laboratories
Laboratories are an essential component of screening,
diagnosis, and treatment options. They are required
for rapid, accurate results from cytology or biopsies, or
from the analysis of blood chemistry for chemotherapy.
These services are typically not available in Basic, or
even Limited, facilities. Although it is possible to send
specimens collected from rural residents to a major city,
the results are often not obtained in a sufficiently timely
manner to provide optimal treatment. Hence, treatments involving extensive laboratory support are often
not feasible in settings without facilities with Enhanced
resources, as in urban areas of MICs (see Fleming in
DCP3 volume 9, Disease Control Priorities).

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

265

Cancer Registries
Cancer registries, which form the basis for understanding and documenting patterns of cancer, are a basic tool
in health care service provision. In LMICs, the percentage of the population covered by a high-quality registry,
such as those in the International Agency for Research on
Cancer’s series on Cancer Incidence in Five Continents
(Curado and others 2007), is in the single digits; this level
rises to double digits in Europe; it is 80 percent or more
only in Australia, New Zealand, and North America.
Although it is not essential to have 100 percent population coverage, country planning and policy setting are
much more difficult in the absence of a cancer registry of
reasonable quality that covers at least one region.
Skilled Medical Personnel
The lack of adequate numbers of skilled medical personnel in LICs affects the ability to screen for, as well as
to treat, cancer. LICs have few oncologists and oncology
nurses, which limits treatment ability. Although some of
the tests involved in cancer screening are often deceptively low-technology interventions (for example, Pap
smears, clinical breast exams, and fecal occult blood
tests), the organizational skills and infrastructure to conduct them successfully at scale and ensure appropriate
referral make screening a high-technology intervention.
Accordingly, organized screening programs become feasible in urban areas of MICs. Opportunistic screening,
however, can occur in countries at all levels, provided
that the screening test involved is not too demanding;
clinical breast examination, visual inspection with acetic
acid of the cervix, and the rapid DNA test for human
papillomavirus (HPV) in low-resource environments
are all possibilities. Campaign-style screening has been
successfully used in LMICs, for example, in the Arab
Republic of Egypt for breast cancer and in India for oral
cancer; a rapid DNA test for cervical cancer is being
piloted in low-resource provinces in China. In a campaign, the effort is made to screen a large number of the
vulnerable groups in a short period of time, sometimes
in local health facilities and sometimes using outreach,
for example, using mobile facilities.
Health Insurance
Health insurance conditions access to all services,
including treatment and screening. Individuals, who
often underinvest in preventive health measures, may
not see the value of paying for screening tests, particularly if they cannot afford treatment if they are subsequently diagnosed. The proportion of the population
covered by health insurance typically increases with

266

Cancer

the level of development. In the poorer countries, only
those people working in the formal sector or for the
government may be covered; coverage in rural areas is
minimal. Out-of-pocket spending on health constituted
48.1 percent of health expenditures in LICs, 52.8 percent
in lower-middle income countries, 33.3 percent in
upper-middle income countries, and only 13.7 percent
in HICs (table 16.1, using data for the most recent years
available from World Bank 2013). Expansion of insurance coverage in Mexico since 2003 through Seguro
Popular—the scheme that covers those working outside
the formal sector—was accompanied by an increase in
coverage of cervical cancer screening and a reduction in
the proportion of those abandoning breast cancer treatment (Knaul and others 2012). Chapter 17 elaborates
further on the role of health financing in cancer care.
Although the importance of country resource levels
for the inputs required for different aspects of cancer care
has been documented, some countries underperform
despite relatively high levels of income. The dislocation of public health systems in the Russian Federation
following the economic system change, combined with
adverse risk factors that include the relatively high
consumption of fat, tobacco, and alcohol, is associated
with high rates of incidence as well as overall cancer
mortality. For example, 25 percent of the cases of
colon cancer are diagnosed at stage 4 and 33 percent
of newly diagnosed patients die within a year of diagnosis (Avksentyeva 2010). Many of those diagnosed
are not eligible to receive reimbursement for drugs; of
those who are eligible, drug supply problems inhibit the
success of treatment. A cancer registry has existed since
1939 and, in theory, screening programs exist for at least
five cancers. In practice, however, the lack of resourcing and lack of political will are associated with poor
outcomes in cancer care (Avksentyeva 2010).
International Partnerships
Local champions can enable countries to outperform
others at similar income levels. Local champions—
key individuals willing to exert their influence in
advocacy and/or leadership—can draw on substantial
international resources that can make a difference,
whether through partnership with a single other country
or hospital or through membership in international
networks. Partnerships have been used extensively for
pediatric cancer in particular (Sloan and Gelband 2007,
chapter 7). Although international financial resources
can be important in saving lives, such as the radiation
facilities provided by the International Atomic Energy
Authority (IAEA) to selected Sub-Saharan African countries, the true value of these resources lies in access to

expertise and support for developing guidelines and
systems.
Cancer care works best in the context of a national
cancer plan, and political leadership and the will to provide the funding for the plan are keys. The World Health
Organization reports that, although increasing numbers
of countries surveyed have developed cancer plans over
the past decade, many countries still have not dedicated
resources to fund these plans (WHO 2012).
The role of partnerships with or membership in
international networks matters at all levels, including the
following examples:
• For clinicians: World Endoscopy Society, http://
www.worldendo.org
• For guideline-setting: Breast Health Global Initiative,
http://portal.bhgi.org/Pages/Default.aspx or Asia
Pacific Working Group on Colorectal Cancer
• For screening: International Cancer Screening
Network, http://appliedresearch.gov.icsn
• For training: IAEA’s support of radiation personnel training in eight LICs and MICs through its
Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy model
demonstration sites project, http://cancer.iaea.org
/pmds.asp
Partnerships between institutions, such as twinning
arrangements between cancer hospitals, serve a similar
function.

COST-EFFECTIVENESS
Cost-Effectiveness Methods
Cost-effectiveness methods are described in standard
texts (such as Drummond and others 2005); these methods have been applied widely in LMICs for infectious
disease, for example, where there are large flows of international assistance. These methods have been much less
well used for cancer interventions in LMICs, with the
exception of vaccines for hepatitis B (HBV) and HPV
and new DNA tests for HPV.
For this volume, a systematic literature search was
undertaken to identify studies from LMICs for all aspects
of care for six cancers; the literature on tobacco control
is addressed separately in chapter 10. The search covered
English language articles contained in PubMed and
EconLit from 2000 to 2013. The detailed search terms,
inclusion criteria, and full table of results are available in
annex 16A. The articles are also graded for quality using
a checklist based on Drummond and others (2005).
Fewer than 15 articles were found for the costeffectiveness of interventions for breast, colon, liver,
oral, and pediatric cancers in LMICs—including four

for HBV. In contrast, 16 articles were found that satisfied the inclusion criteria for the cost-effectiveness of
vaccination and/or screening for cervical cancer. This
result may reflect the fact that international funding
has been available to investigate and promote the vaccines, principally through Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance.
An additional six articles for breast and colon cancer
were found for HICs in Asia. These six were included,
since they may provide some guidance for MICs in
this region.
Another reason that may explain the thin literature is that there are very few articles (whether for
LMICs or HICs) on the cost-effectiveness of surgery,
the cornerstone of cancer treatment. The effectiveness
of basic surgery was established long before economic
cost-effectiveness methods were developed and surgery
became “usual care.”
Given the lack of cost-effectiveness data for LMICs,
the literature from other countries might prove helpful.
The literature from HICs may provide guidance and the
literature from HICs in Asia may be useful for other
countries in the region. The cost-effectiveness literature
has to be used cautiously, since the greater the difference in context (including disease patterns, prevalence,
usual care alternatives, costs, and comorbidities), the
less reliable the comparison is likely to be. We utilized
cost-effectiveness findings from HICs from the web
appendix of Greenberg and others (2010). Greenberg
and colleagues undertook a systematic review of interventions for several cancers in HICs. Their approach
yielded some useful studies, primarily for breast cancer,
that have relevance for LMICs.
In tables 16.3 through 16.8, we indicate generally whether an intervention is “very cost-effective,”
“cost-effective,” or “not cost-effective” in a given study.
A few countries have set their own decision criteria,
for example, the National Institute for Health and Care
Excellence in the United Kingdom. In a comprehensive
study of cost-effectiveness in Australia, Vos and others (2010) categorize interventions that cost less than
US$10,000 per quality-adjusted life year (QALY) as very
cost-effective; those interventions between US$10,000
and US$50,000 per QALY are cost-effective; and those
over $50,000 per QALY are not cost-effective. A similar
limit (US$50,000) is often used in the United States
as the dividing line between what is and is not costeffective. For countries that have not established their
own threshold, the Commission on Macroeconomics
and Health (2001) suggests that interventions costing
less than one times the per capita gross national product per DALY averted are very cost-effective and those
between one and three times per capita gross national
product are cost-effective.

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

267

What is very cost-effective in HICs might merit
consideration in LICs and what is cost-effective in HICs
might be considered in MICs. This approach presupposes that the underlying model is similar, namely, the
interventions are similar and the “no intervention” or
“standard care” alternative scenarios are also similar, as
are other key parameters. Country-specific data would
be better in the future to guide policy.
The results summarized in the following section draw
on the cost-effectiveness analyses in other chapters of
this volume: Anderson and others (chapter 3), Denny
and others (chapter 4), Sankaranarayanan and others
(chapter 5), Rabeneck and others (chapter 6), Gupta and
others (chapter 7), and Gelband and others (chapter 8).
These analyses, in turn, utilize systematic literature
surveys for the LMICs described in annex 16A.
Cost-Effectiveness Results
Table 16.2 summarizes the specific resources likely to be
available at each of the four facility environments: Basic,
Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal. Cancer care feasible
in facilities with Basic resources is likely to be the norm
in LICs, care feasible in facilities with Limited resources
predominates for the rural population in MICs, care

feasible in facilities with Enhanced resources is likely
to be available for urban populations in MICs, and
facilities with Maximal resources are broadly available
only in some HICs. Almost all countries, irrespective of
income, have some facilities with Maximal resources to
which a minority of the population has access or can be
referred.
These resource categories are used as an organizing
framework for five of the six major cancers covered.
The exception is pediatric cancer, which has a similar
ranking of feasibility but is determined differently.
Patients with pediatric cancers, which are relatively rare,
are often referred to specialized facilities. Specialized
facilities with the least expertise can successfully treat a
limited range of pediatric cancers; the range increases as
experience grows.
Tables 16.3 through 16.8 summarize by resource
environment the feasibility of various interventions for
the six cancers considered: breast, cervical, colorectal,
liver, oral, and pediatric. The cost-effectiveness evidence
is provided where it exists, along with the country context in which the data were obtained. For surgery, the
cost-effectiveness data are virtually nonexistent, even for
HICs, except for new techniques, such as laparoscopic
surgery. Data are most abundant for pharmaceuticals,

Table 16.2 Cancer Care Tools in Four Resource Environments
Basic

• Resources for organized screening and treatment of precancer conditions do not exist; vertical programs, such as mobile
services for screen-and-treat options in one or two visits, may be feasible.
• Basic surgery is available but in limited supply; specialized surgery skills may be available only by referral to another facility.
• Radiation therapy is very scarce or unavailable.
• Chemotherapy is not feasible because of the lack of laboratory facilities for required blood work.

Limited

• Mobile screening units are an option; rapid DNA testing is possible, if cost is sufficiently low.
• Availability of surgery is better but still limited.
• Radiation therapy is scarce and patients may need to travel long distances for access.
• Chemotherapy may be possible, using off-patent drugs and “classical” therapies; new techniques, such as metronomics,
may be considered. Laboratory facilities are limited.
• Limited treatment of precancer conditions occurs at lower-level health facilities and first-level hospitals.

Enhanced

• Organized screening can be considered, along with treatment of precancer conditions at facilities at different levels.
• Radiotherapy and surgery are widely available.
• Chemotherapy is possible and newer generations of drugs can be considered, although typically not those still on-patent.
Laboratory facilities are available on site to support use of chemotherapy.
• The most advanced hospitals can offer most of the care options available in high-income countries, but budgets are
insufficient to make such care broadly available.

Maximal

• State-of-the-art treatment is available; however, even in high-income countries, health budgets still require hard choices, and
private insurers or public systems may carefully ration access to the most costly therapies.

Note: Resource typology based on Breast Health Global Initiative (Anderson and others, chapter 3). Most facilities in low-income countries have Basic levels of resources, facilities
in rural areas in middle-income countries generally have Limited resources, most facilities in urban areas of middle-income countries have Enhanced resources, and facilities with
Maximal resources are widespread only in some industrial countries.

268

Cancer

since these data are often required in HICs as part of the
approval process for new drugs.
Interventions listed as options in the Basic environment are limited to those that the evidence suggests are very cost-effective in HICS or cost-effective
in LMICs. The range of options is broadened a little
in the Limited environment to include items that are
“close to being very cost-effective” in HICs, or “possibly
cost-effective in LMICs,” and the greater feasibility of
radiation and chemotherapy options broadens the range
for consideration.
In the Enhanced environment, more interventions are
feasible because of the greater availability of resources
and because a larger percent of the population is
located in urban areas and able to undertake treatments
that require regular visits, for example, for preoperative radiotherapy, or require more intensive follow-up,

for example, for organized screening. Options that are
not recommended in this environment are those that are
not cost-effective even in HICs.
Finally, in the Maximal environment, an even broader
range of options is available, some of which are costeffective in those environments. Those that are currently
not cost-effective—for example, some new chemotherapy agents—may well eventually become cost-effective
once they no longer have patent protection.

CONCLUSIONS
Feasibility and cost-effectiveness data suggest that
cancer care can and should be expanded in LMICs.
Table 16.9 summarizes the interventions, by cancer and
by resource level, which are supported by feasibility
and cost-effectiveness data, noting that virtually no

Table 16.3 Breast Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource Level
Resource
level

Intervention type

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Basic

Detection

Clinical history and CBE

• CBE cost-effective in Ghana (Zelle and others 2012)

Treatment,
stages I and II

Modified radical mastectomy;
ovarian ablation in premenopausal
(stage I) or all (stage II)

—

Test for ER and add tamoxifen if
feasible; add chemotherapy (classical
CMF or AC, EC, or FAC if blood
chemistry and CBC available)

• Either tamoxifen or chemotherapy very cost-effective after surgery in
United states for younger women (Hillner and Smith 1991; Malin and
others 2002)

Treatment, locally
advanced

Same options as for stages I and II;
add preoperative chemotherapy if
resources available

—

Detection

CBE with diagnostic ultrasound or
mammography in target group

• Single lifetime CBE very cost-effective in India

Limited

• Tamoxifen very cost-effective in the Republic of Korea (Yang and
others 2010)

• Every three years or every five years cost-effective (Okonkwo and
others 2008)
• Annual CBE very cost-effective in Vietnam (Nguyen and others 2013)

Treatment,
stages I and II

Treatment, locally
advanced

Breast-conserving surgery; add
irradiation of chest wall for high-risk
stage II

• Breast-conserving surgery versus modified radical mastectomy cost-effective
in United States (Norum and others 1997)

Chemotherapy (classical CMF or AC,
EC, or FAC if blood chemistry and
CBC available)

• Very cost-effective after surgery in United States for younger women
(Hillner and Smith 1991; Malin and others 2002)

Same options as for stages I and II;
add irradiation of chest wall

• Cost-effective in United States for older women (Desch and others
1993; Hillner, Smith, and Desch 1993; Malin and others 2002; Naeim and
Keeler 2005)
—
table continues next page

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

269

Table 16.3 Breast Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource
Level (continued)
Resource
level

Intervention type

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Enhanced

Detection

Mammography every two years for
women ages 55–69 years; every
12–18 months for women ages
40–54 years

• Mammography every year for women over age 50 years and every two
years in high-risk women ages 40–49 years cost-effective in Mexico
(Salomon and others 2012)

Treatment,
stages I and II

Breast-conserving surgery and
whole-breast irradiation

—

Aromatase inhibitors or LH-RH
agonists (hormones) and taxanes
(chemo) to replace tamoxifen and
classical chemo, respectively

• Using raloxifene (taxane) instead of tamoxifen cost-effective for some
women in United States (Armstrong and others 2001)

Treatment, locally
advanced

Add trastuzumab for HER2/neu+
disease

• Short-course trastuzumab very cost-effective in United States compared
with usual treatment for women with HER2+ disease (Malin and others
2002). Using letrozole (aromatase) instead of tamoxifen very cost-effective
in United States for advanced disease (Dranitsaris, Verma, and Trudeau 2003;
Karnon and others 2003)

Detection

Mammography every year for women
ages 40 years and older

• Mammography every three years in the Republic of Korea for women ages
45–65 years not cost-effective (Lee and others 2009)

Maximal

• Using letrozole instead of tamoxifen cost-effective in United States
(Delea and others 2007). Using anastrozole (aromatase) instead of
tamoxifen cost-effective in Brazil (Fonseca, Araújo, and Saad 2009);
very cost-effective in United States (Moeremans and others 2006);
not cost-effective in Spain (Gil and others 2006)

• Mammography every two years in Hong Kong SAR, China, for women ages
40–69 years cost-effective (Wong and others 2007)
Treatment,
stages I and II

Add trastuzumab for HER2/neu+
disease

Treatment, stages
I and II, locally
advanced

Add growth factors and dose-dense
chemotherapy

Metastatic

Use bevacizumab (chemo),
fulvestrant (hormone), and growth
factors (supportive)

• Very cost-effective in Singapore (de Lima Lopes 2011)
• Cost-effective in Belgium (van Vlaenderen and others 2009), Canada
(Hedden and others 2012), Italy and United States (Liberato and others
2007), Netherlands (Essers and others 2010)
• Growth factors cost-effective in Japan for high-risk early cancer
(Ishiguro and others 2010)
• Not cost-effective in United States for early stage (Ramsey and others
2009)
• Bevacizumab not cost-effective in United Kingdom (Rodgers and others
2011), United States (Montero and others 2012)
• Fulvestrant cost-effective in United Kingdom (Cameron and others 2008)

Note: See individual studies for further details, such as age and hormone status, for which cost-effectiveness results were obtained. Screening and treatment typically become less cost-effective
for women ages 60 years and older. Resource typology based on Breast Health Global Initiative (Anderson and others, chapter 3). Most facilities in low-income countries have Basic levels of
resources, facilities in rural areas in middle-income countries generally have Limited resources, most facilities in urban areas of middle-income countries have Enhanced resources, and facilities
with Maximal resources are widespread only in some industrial countries. The table is cumulative, for example, treatments that are feasible in facilities with Basic environments are also feasible
in facilities with Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal resources. AC = doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan); CBC = complete blood count; CBE = clinical breast examination;
CMF = cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil; EC = epirubicin and cyclophosphamide; ER = estrogen receptor; FAC = fluorouracil, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and cyclophosphamide
(Cytoxan); LH-RH = luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone; — = not available.

cost-effectiveness data are available for surgery. The interventions provide suggestions to policy makers as to the
sequence in which to add publicly funded interventions
as country income increases, as part of a cancer plan.
Table 16.9 suggests that LMICs have cost-effective
options in cancer control. More can be done in all countries in prevention, particularly tobacco control, and

270

Cancer

expansion of HPV vaccine and DNA testing for cervical
cancer, provided that the costs can be reduced sufficiently.
There are methods to reduce the risk of liver cancer. The
large expansion of HBV vaccination is a success story in
preventing cancer.
The cost-effectiveness results suggest that a sustained expansion of cancer treatment is appropriate in

Table 16.4 Cervical Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions,
by Resource Level
Resource level

Intervention type

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Basic

Prevention

HPV vaccination of adolescent girls

Cost-effective in LMICs if the following three
conditions apply:
1. Cost per vaccinated girl is low enough
(US$10–25): Gavi-eligible countries can likely
achieve this
2. Incidence is high
3. Vaccine protection is long-lasting (chapter 4)

Detection

VIA starting at age 35 years, one
to three times per lifetime, or rapid
DNA test starting at age 35 years,
two or three times per lifetime,
assuming cost per HPV test is less
than US$10

• Very cost-effective (Praditsitthikorn and
others 2011, Thailand)
• Rapid DNA is very cost-effective in LMICs
with screen-and-treat in single visit (Goldie
and others 2005) but difficult to undertake
in practice
• Cost-effective in MICs with two visits
required (Kim and others 2008; Levin and
others 2010)

Diagnosis

Colposcopy

—

Treatment, precancer

Cryotherapy for suspicious
precancerous lesions

—

Treatment, early-stage cancer

LEEP, CKC, simple hysterectomy

—

Limited

Treatment, more advanced
stage cancer

Surgery and/or radiation therapy

—

Enhanced

Screening

Cytology every two to three years,
starting at time of initiation of
sexual activity; DNA test 1–3 times
per lifetime

• Cytology may be cost-effective if quality
control is good (Kim and others 2008)

Prevent and screen

HPV vaccination combined with
screening

Can be cost-effective in all countries, depending
on cost per vaccinated girl and cost of screening
strategy chosen (Denny and others, chapter 4)

Treatment options

Add chemotherapy (cisplatin) where
warranted

—

Treatment options

Trachelectomy (fertility-sparing
surgery), brachytherapy, intensitymodulated radiotherapy

—

Maximal

• DNA testing cost-effective depending on
test cost, frequency of testing (Campos and
others 2012)

Note: Resource typology based on Breast Health Global Initiative (Anderson and others, chapter 3). Most facilities in low-income countries have Basic levels of resources,
facilities in rural areas in middle-income countries generally have Limited resources, most facilities in urban areas of middle-income countries have Enhanced resources, and
facilities with Maximal resources are widespread only in some industrial countries. The table is cumulative, for example, treatments that are feasible in facilities with Basic
environments are also feasible in facilities with Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal resources. CKC = cold knife conization; HPV = human papillomavirus; LEEP = loop electrosurgical
excision procedure; LMICs = low- and middle-income countries; MICs = middle-income countries; VIA = visual inspection with acetic acid; — = not available.

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

271

Table 16.5 Colorectal Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource Level
Resource
level

Intervention type

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Basic

Prevention

Tax cigarettes

Very cost-effective for various cancers

Detect/diagnose

Use barium enema where colonoscopy
not available

—

Treatment, stages I, II, III colon

Hemicolectomy and regional lymph
node dissection

—

Treatment, stages I, II, III rectal

Abdominal perineal resection with
lymph node dissection

—

Treatment, stage IV colorectal

Consider palliative surgery

—

Treatment, stages I and II colon

Hemicolectomy and regional lymph
node dissection

—

Treatment, stage I rectal

Abdominal perineal resection with
lymph node dissection

—

Treatment, stage III colon

Hemicolectomy and regional lymph
node dissection plus adjuvant
5-fluorouracil

• Adjuvant chemotherapy close to being very
cost-effective in United States versus no
adjuvant after surgery for colorectal cancer
(Nostrum and others 1997)

Limited

• Adjuvant chemotherapy close to being very
cost-effective in United States versus no
adjuvant after surgery for colorectal cancer,
colon cancer (Smith and others 1993)
Treatment, stages II and III rectal

Abdominal perineal resection
with lymph node dissection plus
preoperative short course radiotherapy;
add 5-fluorouracil

• Adjuvant chemotherapy close to being very
cost-effective in United States versus no
adjuvant after surgery for colorectal cancer
(Nostrum and others 1997)
• Preoperative radiotherapy very cost-effective
in United States versus no preoperative
radiotherapy (van den Brink and others 2004)

Enhanced

Treatment, stage IV colorectal

Consider palliative surgery; consider
palliative 5-fluorouracil-based
chemotherapy

—

Detection

Organized screening (beginning with
pilot)

• Very cost-effective in United States (gFOBT)
(Pignone, Russell, and Wagner 2005)
• Cost-effective in United States (colonoscopy)
(Pignone, Russell, and Wagner 2005)
• Very cost-effective in high-income Asia
(gFOBT, sigmoidoscopy, colonoscopy) (Park, Yun,
and Kwon 2005; Tsoi and others 2008; Wong,
Leong, and Leong 2004; Wu and others 2006)

Treatment, stages I and II colon

Hemicolectomy with en bloc removal of
at least 12 lymph nodes

—

Treatment, stage I rectal

Total mesorectal excision

—

Treatment, stage III colon

Hemicolectomy plus removal of at least
12 lymph nodes plus adjuvant FOLFOX

FOLFOX very cost-effective in United Kingdom
versus 5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin (Aballéa and
others 2007)
table continues next page

272

Cancer

Table 16.5 Colorectal Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource
Level (continued)
Resource
level

Maximal

Intervention type

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Treatment, stages II and III rectal

Total mesorectal excision; preoperative
chemo-radiotherapy; capecitabine
or infusional 5-fluorouracil; adjuvant
FOLFOX

—

Treatment, stage IV colorectal

Consider palliative surgery; palliative
radiation; FOLFOX/FOLFIRI; possibly
aggressive surgery for cure

—

Treatment, stages I and II colon

Surgery: can use polypectomy for
selected stage I cancers; consider
adjuvant 5-fluorouracil or capecitabine
in high-risk stage II; can consider LAC

• LAC not cost-effective in United States
(Hayes and Hansen 2007)
• Not cost-effective in United States for
colorectal cancer (de Verteuil, Hernández, and
Vale 2007)

Treatment, stage I rectal

Total mesorectal excision

—

Treatment, stage III colon

Hemicolectomy plus removal of at least
12 lymph nodes plus adjuvant FOLFOX

FOLFOX very cost-effective in United Kingdom
versus 5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin (Aballéa and
others 2007)

Treatment, stages II and III rectal

Total mesorectal excision; preoperative
chemo-radiotherapy; capecitabine or
infusional 5-fluorouracil; adjuvant FOLFOX

—

Treatment, stage IV colorectal

As for stage IV (Enhanced); plus
biological options (bevucizumab,
aflibercept; if K-Ras wild-type
cetuximab, panitumumab; regorafenib)

• Cetuximab plus irinotecan versus active or best
support care not cost-effective in United
States (Starling and others 2007)
• Bevucizumab plus irrotecan and 5-fluorouracil
plus leucovorin versus irrotecan and
5-fluorouracil plus leucovorin not costeffective in United States (Tappenden and
others 2007)

Note: Resource typology based on Breast Health Global Initiative (Anderson and others 2014). Most facilities in low-income countries have Basic levels of resources, facilities in
rural areas in middle-income countries generally have Limited resources, most facilities in urban areas of middle-income countries have Enhanced resources, and facilities with
Maximal resources are widespread only in some industrialized countries. The table is cumulative, for example, treatments that are feasible in facilities with Basic environments are
also feasible in facilities with Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal resources. FOLFIRI = folinic acid, fluorouracil, and irinotecan; FOLFOX = folinic acid, fluorouracil, and oxalipatin;
gFOBT = guaiac fecal occult blood test; K-Ras = Kirsten rat sarcoma viral oncogene homolog; LAC = laparoscopically-assisted colectomy; — = not available.

Table 16.6 Liver Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource Level
Resource
level

Intervention
type

Basic

Prevention

Limited

Prevention

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Hepatitis B vaccination of neonates (East and
Southeast Asia); infants (Sub-Saharan Africa)

Cost-effective/very cost-effective in intermediate- and highprevalence countries (Beutels 2001; Ozawa and others 2012)

Aflatoxin reduction through better post-harvest
handling and storage

Cost-effective in Guinea (Khlangwiset and Wu, 2010)

Hepatitis B vaccination of infants or adolescents

Cost-effective/very cost-effective in intermediate- and highprevalence countries (Beutels 2001; Ozawa and others 2012)

Aflatoxin reduction through biocontrol (different
seed strains)

Very cost-effective in Nigeria (Wu and Khlangwiset 2010),
but validation needed; however, analysis did not take account
of cost of diffusion of technology
table continues next page

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

273

Table 16.6 Liver Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource
Level (continued)
Resource
level

Enhanced

Maximal

Intervention
type

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Prevention programs for hepatitis C through
reducing unsafe injections (for example, autodisposable syringes) and screening blood donors

Using auto-disposable syringes is very cost-effective in
India (Reid 2012)

Prevention programs for liver flukes through
education regarding food habits and hygiene

—

Prevention

Hepatitis B vaccination of infants, children, and
adolescents

Cost-effective in intermediate and high-prevalence countries
(Beutels 2001; Ozawa and others 2012)

Treatment

Screening for and treatment with praziquantel
for liver flukes in high-prevalence regions

—

Prevention

Hepatitis B vaccination of adolescents

Possibly cost-effective or not cost-effective in lowprevalence countries (Beutels 2001)

Treatment

Hepatitis B virus treatment with antivirals or
immune system modulators

Possibly cost-effective in HICs (chapter 8)

Treatment

Hepatitis C: pegylated interferon treatment plus
ribavirin

Cost-effective only in select patients in HICs (chapter 8)

Treatment

Various treatments of hepatocellular carcinoma
or cholangiocarcinoma

Not cost-effective even in HICs because of poor survival
even with treatment (chapter 8)

Note: Resource typology based on Breast Health Global Initiative (Anderson and others, chapter 3). Most facilities in low-income countries have Basic levels of resources, facilities
in rural areas in middle-income countries generally have Limited resources, most facilities in urban areas of middle-income countries have Enhanced resources, and facilities with
Maximal resources are widespread only in some industrial countries. The table is cumulative, for example, treatments that are feasible in facilities with Basic environments are
also feasible in facilities with Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal resources. HICs = high-income countries; — = not available.

Table 16.7 Oral Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource Level
Resource
level

Intervention
type

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Basic

Prevention

Tobacco and alcohol taxes

Cost-saving (cannot be separated from impact on other
cancers) (chapter 10)

Screening

Visual screening by trained personnel (for
example, dentist or nurse) of high-risk groups
(known or self-declared tobacco and alcohol
users) or by all at risk (for example, over
35 years of age) in high-prevalence regions;
screening is sporadic rather than organized

• Cost-effective where prevalence is reasonably high;
very cost-effective for screening high-risk groups (India:
Subramanian and others 2009)

Diagnosis

Visual inspection; biopsy; X-ray to diagnose
spread

—

Treatment

Surgery, no adjuvant treatment, for stages
I, II, III; availability of surgery for oral
reconstruction very limited

—

• Cost-effective in three HICs with prevalence of 30 or more
per 100,000 in men, age-adjusted population (Netherlands:
van der Meij, Bezemer, and van der Waal 2002; United
Kingdom: Speight and others 2006; United States: Dedhia
and others 2011)

Pain control, stage IV
table continues next page

274

Cancer

Table 16.7 Oral Cancer: Summary of Feasibility and Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Resource
Level (continued)
Resource
level

Intervention
type

Limited

Treatment

Enhanced

Screening

Organized screening is possible

Cost-effective (Dedhia and others 2011; Speight and others
2006; Subramanian and others 2009; van der Meij, Bezemer,
and van der Waal 2002)

Diagnosis

CT scan to confirm spread

—

Treatment

Surgery and/or radiotherapy or brachytherapy
and/or off-patent chemotherapy, stages II, III
and IV, depending on type/location of tumor;
reconstructive surgery possible

—

Intervention details

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Add postoperative radiotherapy if indicated
(stage II or III, depending on type and location
of tumor) or radical radiotherapy instead of
surgery (stage II or II, depending on type/
location of tumor)

—

Palliative radiotherapy, stage IV

Palliative chemotherapy, stage IV
Maximal

Diagnosis

PET, MRI to determine spread if bone/soft
tissue potentially involved; can consider
chemotherapy with patent drugs

—

Note: Resource typology based on Breast Health Global Initiative (Anderson and others, chapter 3). Most facilities in low-income countries have Basic levels of resources, facilities
in rural areas in middle-income countries generally have Limited resources, most facilities in urban areas of middle-income countries have Enhanced resources, and facilities with
Maximal resources are widespread only in some industrialized countries. The table is cumulative, for example, treatments that are feasible in facilities with Basic environments
are also feasible in facilities with Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal resources. CT = computerized tomography; HICs = high-income countries; MRI = magnetic resonance imaging;
PET = positron emission tomography; — = not available.

Table 16.8 Pediatric Cancer: Summary of Likely Cost-Effectiveness of Interventions, by Experience Level
Experience level

Cancer treated

Cost-effectiveness (if available)

Center with least
expertise

Burkitt lymphoma

Very cost-effective (Malawi: Bhakta and others 2013)

Hodgkin lymphoma (adolescents and adults)

Very cost-effective (Norway: Norum and others 1996)

Center with more
expertise

Wilms tumor

Cost-effective (Brazil: Bhakta and others 2013)

Acute lymphoblastic leukemia

Very cost-effective (Netherlands: van Litsenburg and
others 2011); cost-effective (China: Luo and others 2009)

Intraocular retinoblastoma

—

Sarcomas, brain tumors, acute myeloid leukemia,
high-risk neuroblastoma, other retinoblastomas

—

Center with most
expertise

Note: Sequencing of cancer is illustrative rather than exhaustive. Feasibility of treatment of pediatric cancer does not follow the same pattern as adult cancers. Pediatric cancers
are rare and many low-income countries have used the approach of treatment in specialized centers. Prevention is not an important issue (other than via hepatitis B vaccination);
because incidence is very low, population-level screening is not an option. — = not available.

all LMICs. The expansion of capacity for surgery and
radiation is a priority throughout. The use of tamoxifen
is feasible and cost-effective for breast cancer in LICs, and
newer hormone treatments can be cost-effective in MICs.
In MICs, the use of classical chemotherapy regimens for
breast and cervical cancer is cost-effective; in areas where

Enhanced facilities predominate. Chemotherapy can
be expanded to include newer regimens for breast and
cervical cancers and chemotherapy regimens for colon
and oral cancers.
As treatment is scaled up, screening is more important to stage-shift treatment. LICs with largely Basic

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

275

Table 16.9 Summary Recommendations Based on Feasibility and Cost-Effectiveness, by Resource Level
Cancer

Intervention by resource level

Primary prevention
Tobacco-related

Taxation of cigarettes, legislation, regulation (ALL)

Cervical

HPV vaccine (ALL: cost-effectiveness depends on price)

Liver

• HBV vaccination integrated with expanded program for immunization (B)
• Neonatal (L, E); adolescent (E, M)
• Screening blood donors (E, M); reducing unsafe injections (L, E, M)
• Education to prevent liver fluke infection (L, E, M)
• Aflatoxin reduction: post-harvest storage (B); biocontrol (L)

Screening and detection (to stage-shift treatment)
Breast

• Clinical breast exam (B, L)
• Mammography (E, M)

Cervical

• Visual inspection with acetic acid (B, L)
• Rapid DNA test and treat in two visits (L)
• DNA test, cytology (E, M)

Colorectal

Fecal immunochemical test (E); fecal immunochemical or endoscopy (M)

Liver cancer

Screen and treat for liver flukes in high-prevalence regions (E, M)

Oral cancer

Visual inspection (L, high-prevalence countries only)

Treatment with curative intent
Breast

• Surgery (ALL); radiation (L, E, M)
• Hormones: tamoxifen (B, L); aromatase inhibitors, LH-RH agonists (E); fulvestrant (M)
• Chemotherapy: CMF or AC (B); EC or FAC (L); taxanes (E); trastuzumab (E, M)
• Growth factors (M); bevacizumab (M)

Cervical

• Surgery (ALL); trachelectomy (M)
• Cryotherapy (B, L); radiotherapy (L, E, M); brachytherapy, intensity modulated brachytherapy (M)
• Chemotherapy (cisplatin) (E, M)

Colorectal

• Surgery: colon (ALL); rectal (L, E, M)
• Radiation: preoperative, rectal (L); chemo-radiotherapy preoperative, rectal (E, M)
• Chemotherapy: classical 5-fluorouracil (L); FOLFOX (E, M)

Liver

• Antivirals or immune system modulators for hepatitis B (M)
• Hepatitis C (M, cost-effective only in select patients)
• Treatment of liver cancer (M, although not generally cost-effective)

Oral

Surgery (ALL); radiotherapy (L, E, M); brachytherapy (E, M); chemotherapy (E, M)

Pediatric

• Burkitt lymphoma, Hodgkin lymphoma (specialized center, least expertise)
• Wilms tumor (specialized center, more expertise)
• Sarcomas, brain tumors, acute myeloid leukemia, high-risk neuroblastoma (specialized center, most expertise)
table continues next page

276

Cancer

Table 16.9 Summary Recommendations Based on Feasibility and Cost-Effectiveness, by Resource Level (continued)
Cancer

Intervention by resource level

Advanced disease
All

• Pain control (ALL)
• Home or hospice care (ALL)
• Palliative radiotherapy (L, E, M, as resources allow)
• Palliative surgery (as resources allow)
• Palliative chemotherapy (L, classical; E, next generations; M, on-patent, as resources allow)
• Aggressive treatment with curative intent (M)

Note: Resource typology based on Breast Health Global Initiative (Anderson and others, chapter 3). Most facilities in low-income countries have Basic levels of resources, facilities in rural
areas in middle-income countries generally have Limited resources, most facilities in urban areas of middle-income countries have Enhanced resources, and facilities with Maximal
resources are widespread only in some industrial countries. Higher resource–level countries can consider any of the options from lower resource levels. The table is cumulative, for
example, treatments that are feasible in facilities with Basic environments are also feasible in facilities with Limited, Enhanced, and Maximal resources. AC = doxorubicin (Adriamycin) and
cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan); ALL = all resource levels; B = Basic resource level; CMF = cyclophosphamide, methotrexate, and fluorouracil; E = Enhanced resource level; EC = epirubicin and
cyclophosphamide; FAC = fluorouracil, doxorubicin (Adriamycin), and cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan); FOLFOX = folinic acid, fluorouracil, and oxalipatin; HBV = hepatitis B virus; HPV = human
papillomavirus; L = Limited resource level; LH–RH = luteinizing hormone–releasing hormone; M = Maximal resource level. Recommendations are based on existing cost-effectiveness data
and expected availability of resources. Recommendations for basic surgery, radiation therapy, hormone therapy, and classical chemotherapy are based on expert opinion, where
cost-effectiveness studies are not available, and are subject to development of infrastructure where it does not yet exist.

facilities are not readily able to undertake organized
screening. Opportunistic screening in LICs and organized screening in MICs can help to identify cancer
earlier to increase the chance of a cure. In LICs, costeffective screening choices include clinical breast examination, visual inspection of the cervix with acetic acid,
and visual inspection for oral cancer in high-prevalence
countries, with rapid DNA test-and-treat for cervical
cancer potentially feasible as country income increases
or the cost of the test falls. Urban areas in MICs
can consider mammography and fecal immunochemical testing for colon cancer, where prevalence patterns
dictate. MICs can screen in rural areas for liver flukes,
if prevalent.
For the common pediatric cancers, a case can be
made for centralizing treatment, either in-country or
in-region. Evidence suggests that many pediatric cancers can be treated cost-effectively, even in LMICs, and
scale-up is feasible.
To support countries as they develop cancer plans,
more work on costing is needed. Experience with other
global health concerns facing LMICs (for example, HIVAIDS and nutrition) suggests that credible estimates of
total costs are important. These estimates can help to
convince the international community that action is
possible and may motivate the substantial mobilization
of resources required. Estimating resource requirements
will be a key next step for the global fight against cancer.
Further research is needed to validate the recommendations for cervical, colorectal, liver, oral, and pediatric
cancer made in table 16.9, including expert consultations and updating of the systematic literature reviews.
The literature search was conducted only in English,

but groups are undertaking cost-effectiveness studies
in Brazil and China, and some literature is not yet categorized in PubMed. Table 16.9 also does not include
studies after 2007 for HICs, except for breast cancer.
It is clear that the literature on cost-effectiveness
in LMICs is thin. More studies need to be done using
best practice methodology, such that findings can be
compared across countries. Multi-country studies with
common assumptions are valuable to help identify
the types of situations where a particular intervention is cost-effective. For screening, there are good
multi-country studies for cervical cancer using a common model, but almost none for the other cancers.
Although the WHO’s Choosing Interventions That Are
Cost-Effective multi-country work has been done for
cervical, breast, and colon cancer screening (for example, Ginsberg and others 2012), this needs to be updated
using state-of-the-art models similar to the large ones
used in HICs. Future economics work on cancer is to
cost out the ingredients required for the priority interventions, such that costs of resource-appropriate care
can be estimated in individual countries. This approach
can help countries to plan for and mobilize the resources
needed to implement a cancer plan.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors thank Hellen Gelband, Carol Levin, Joe
Lipscomb, and Rachel Nugent for helpful suggestions
on earlier drafts, and Benjamin Anderson, Craig Earle,
Surendra Shastri, and Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan
for useful inputs regarding specific cancers.

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

277

ANNEX 16A
The annex to this chapter is as follows. It is available at http://
www.dcp-3.org/cancer.
• Annex 16A. Search terms, Inclusion Criteria, and Results

NOTE
World Bank income classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income per capita
for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries: US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries:
• Lower-middle-income: US$1,046–US$4,125
• Upper-middle-income: US$4,126–US$12,745
High-income countries: US$12,746 or more

REFERENCES
Aballéa, S., A. Boler, A. Craig and H. Wasan. 2007. “An economic
evaluation of oxaliplatin for the Adjuvant Treatment of
Colon Cancer in the United Kingdom.” European Journal of
Cancer 43(11): 1687–93.
Armstrong, K., T. M. Chen, D. Albert, T. C. Randall, and
J. S. Schwartz. 2001. “Cost-Effectiveness of Raloxifene
and Hormone Replacement Therapy in Postmenopausal
Women: Impact of Breast Cancer Risk.” Obstetrics
Gynecology 98 (6): 996–1003.
Avksentyeva, M. 2010. “Colorectal Cancer in Russia.” European
Journal of Health Economics 1: S91–S98.
Beutels, P. 2001. “Economic Evaluations of Hepatitis B
Immunization: A Global Review of Recent Studies
(1994–2000).” Health Economics 10: 751–74.
Bhakta, N., A. L. C. Martiniuk, S. Gupta, and S. C. Howard.
2013. “The Cost-Effectiveness of Treating Paediatric Cancer
in Low-Income and Middle-Income Countries: A CaseStudy Approach Using Acute Lymphocytic Leukaemia
in Brazil and Burkitt Lymphoma in Malawi.” Archives of
Disease in Children 98 (2): 155–60.
Cameron, D. A., D. R. Camidge, J. Oyee, and M. Hirsch. 2008.
“Economic Evaluation of Fulvestrant as an Extra Step in
the Treatment Sequence for ER-Positive Advanced Breast
Cancer.” British Journal of Cancer 99 (12): 1984–90.
Campos, N. G., J. J. Kim, P. E. Castle, J. Ortendahl,
M. O’Shea, and others. 2012. “Health and Economic Impact
of HPV 16/18 Vaccination and Cervical Cancer Screening
in Eastern Africa.” International Journal of Cancer 130 (11):
2672–84.
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health. 2001. WHO.
Macroeconomics and Health: Investing in Health for Economic
Development. Geneva: World Health Organization. http://
whqlibdoc.who.int/publications/2001/924154550x.pdf.
Curado, M. P., B. Edwards, H. R. Shim, H. Storm., J. Ferlay,
and others, eds. 2007. Cancer Incidence in Five Continents,

278

Cancer

vol. IX. Scientific Publications 160. Lyon: International
Agency for Research on Cancer.
de Lima Lopes, G. 2011. “Societal Costs and Benefits of
Treatment with Trastuzumab in Patients with Early
HER2neu-Overexpressing Breast Cancer in Singapore.”
BMC Cancer 11: 178–85.
de Verteuil, R. M., R. A. Hernández, and L. Vale. 2007. “Economic
Evaluation of Laparoscopic Surgery for Colorectal Cancer.”
International Journal of Technology Assessment in Health
Care 23 (4): 464–72.
Dedhia, R. C., K. J. Smith, J. T. Johnson, and M. Roberts. 2011.
“The Cost-Effectiveness of Community-Based Screening
for Oral Cancer in High-Risk Males in the United States:
A Markov Decision Analysis Approach.” Laryngoscope
121 (5): 952–60.
Delea, T.E., J. Karnon, O. Sofrygin, S. K. Thomas, N. L. Papo
and V. Barghout. 2007. “Cost-effectiveness of Letrozole
versus Tamoxifen as Initial Adjuvant Therapy in Hormonereceptor-positive Postmenopausal Women with Early-stage
Breast Cancer.” Clinical Breast Cancer 7 (8): 608–18.
Desch, C. E., B. E. Hillner, T. J. Smith, and S. M. Retchin. 1993.
“Should the Elderly Receive Chemotherapy for NodeNegative Breast Cancer? A Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Examining Total and Active Life-Expectancy Outcomes.”
Journal of Clinical Oncology 11 (4): 777–82.
Dranitsaris, G., S. Verma and M. Trudeau. 2003. “Cost Utility
Analysis of First-line Hormonal Therapy in Advanced
Breast Cancer: Comparison of Two Aromatase Inhibitors
to Tamoxifen.” American Journal of Clinical Oncology 26(3):
289–96.
Drummond, M. F., M. J. Schulpher, G. W. Torrance,
D. J. O’Brien, and G. L. Stoddart. 2005. Methods for
the Economic Evaluation of Health Care Programmes. 3rd
edition. New York: Oxford University Press.
Essers, B. A., S. C. Seferina, V. C. Tjan-Heijnen, J. L. Severens,
A. Novák, and others. 2010. “Transferability of ModelBased Economic Evaluations: The Case of Trastuzumab
for the Adjuvant Treatment of HER2-Positive Early Breast
Cancer in the Netherlands.” Value in Health 13 (4): 375–80.
Fonseca, M., G. T. B. Araújo, and E. D. Saad. 2009. “CostEffectiveness of Anastrozole, in Comparison with
Tamoxifen, in the Adjuvant Treatment of Early Breast
Cancer in Brazil.” Revista Da Associação Medica Brasileira
55: 410–15.
Funk, L. M., T. G. Weiser, W. R. Berry, S. R. Lipsitz, A. F. Merry,
and others. 2010. “Global Operating Theatre Distribution
and Pulse Oximetry Supply: An Estimation from Reported
Data.” Lancet 376 (9746): 1055–61.
Gil, J. M., C. Rubio-Terres, C.A. Del, P. Gonzalez and F. Canorea.
2006. “Pharmacoeconomic Analysis of Adjuvant Therapy
with Exemestane, Anastrozole, Letrozole or Tamoxifen
in Postmenopausal Women with Operable and Estrogen
Receptor-Positive Breast Cancer” Clinical Transl Oncology
8 (5): 339–48.
Ginsberg, G. M., J. A Lauer, S. Zelle, S. Baetan and R. Baltussen.
2012. “Cost Effectiveness of Strategies to Combat Breast,
Cervical, and Colorectal Cancer in sub-Saharan Africa and

South East Asia: Mathematical Modelling Study.” British
Medical Journal 344: eb14. doi:10.1136/bmj.e614.
Goldie, S. J., L. Gaffikin, J. D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, A. GordilloTobar, C. Levin, and others. 2005. “Cost-Effectiveness of
Cervical-Cancer Screening in Five Developing Countries.”
New England Journal of Medicine 353: 2158–68.
Greenberg, D., C. Earle, C. H. Fang, A. Eldar-Lissai, and
P. J. Neumann. 2010. “When Is Cancer Care Cost-Effective?
A Systematic Overview of Cost-Utility Analyses in
Oncology.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 102 (2):
82–88.
Hayes, J. L., and P. Hansen. 2007. “Is Laparoscopic Colectomy
for Cancer Cost-Effective Relative to Open Colectomy?”
Australia and New Zealand Journal of Surgery 77 (9): 782–86.
Hedden, L., S. O’Reilly, C. Lohrisch, S. Chia, C. Speers, and
others. 2012. “Assessing the Real-World Cost-Effectiveness
of Adjuvant Trastuzumab in HER-2/neu Positive Breast
Cancer.” Oncologist 17 (2): 164–71.
Hillner, B. E., and T. J. Smith. 1991. “Efficacy and Cost
Effectiveness of Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Women with
Node-Negative Breast Cancer. A Decision-Analysis Model.”
New England Journal of Medicine 324 (3): 160–68.
———. 1993. “Assessing the Cost Effectiveness of Adjuvant
Therapies in Early Breast Cancer Using a Decision Analysis
Model.” Breast Cancer Research and Treatment 25 (2):
97–105.
IAEA (International Atomic Energy Authority). 2013.
“Radiotherapy Availability.” Programme of Action for
Cancer Therapy (PACT), Programme Office. http://cancer
.iaea.org/agart.asp.
Ishiguro, H., M. Kondo, S. L. Hoshi, M. Takada, S. Nakamura,
and others. 2010. “Economic Evaluation of Intensive
Chemotherapy with Prophylactic Granulocyte ColonyStimulating Factor for Patients with High-Risk Early Breast
Cancer in Japan.” Clinical Therapeutics 32 (2): 11–26.
Karnon, J., R. Delea, S. R. Johnston, R. Smith, J. Brandman,
J. Sung and others 2003. “Cost-effectiveness of Extended
Adjuvant Letrozole in Postmenopausal Women after
Adjuvant Tamoxifen Therapy: the UK Perspective.
Pharmacoeconomics 24 (3): 237–50.
Kim, J. J., K. E. Kobus, M. Diaz, V. Van Minh, and S. J. Goldie.
2008. “Exploring the Cost-Effectiveness of HPV Vaccination
in Vietnam: Insights for Evidence-Based Cervical Cancer
Prevention Policy.” Vaccine 26: 4015–24.
Khlangwiset, P. and F. Wu. 2010. “Costs and Efficacy of Public
Health Interventions to Reduce Aflatoxin-induced Human
Disease.” Food Additives and Contaminants Part A Chemical
Analysis, Control of Exposure and Risk Assessment 27(7):
998–1014.
Knaul, F. M., E. E. González-Pier, O. Gómez-Dantés, D. GarcíaJunco, H. Arreola-Ornelas, and others. 2012. “The Quest for
Universal Health Coverage: Achieving Social Protection for
All in Mexico.” Lancet 350: 1259–79.
Lee, S. Y., S. H. Jeong, Y. N. Kim, J. Kim, D. R. Kang, and others.
2009. “Cost-Effective Mammography Screening in Korea:
High Incidence of Breast Cancer in Young Women.” Cancer
Science 100: 1105–1111.

Levin, C. E., J. Sellors, J.-F. Shi, L. Ma, Y.-L. Qiao, J. Ortendahl,
M. K. H. O’Shea, and S. J. Goldie. 2010. “Cost-effectiveness
Analysis of Cervical Cancer Prevention based on a Rapid
Human Papillomavirus Screening Test in a High-Risk Region
of China.” International Journal of Cancer 127: 1404–11.
Liberato, N. L., M. Marchetti, and G. Barosi. 2007. “CostEffectiveness of Adjuvant Trastuzumab in Human
Epidermal Growth Factor Receptor 2-Positive Breast
Cancer.” Journal of Clinical Oncology. 25(6): 625–33.
Luo, X. Q., Z. Y. Ke, L. B. Huang, X. Q. Guan, Y. C. Zhang,
and others. 2009. “Improved Outcome for Chinese
Children with Acute Promyelocytic Leukemia: A Comparison
of Two Protocols.” Pediatric Blood and Cancer 53: 325–28.
Malin, J. L., E. Keeler, C. Wang, and R. Brook. 2002. “Using
Cost-Effectiveness Analysis to Define a Breast Cancer
Benefits Package for the Uninsured.” Breast Cancer Research
and Treatment 74 (2): 143–53.
Montero, A. J., K. Avancha, S. Glück, and G. Lopes. 2012.
“A Cost-Benefit Analysis of Bevacizumab in Combination
with Paclitaxel in the First-Line Treatment of Patients
with Metastatic Breast Cancer.” Breast Cancer Research and
Treatment 132 (2): 747–51.
Naeim, A., and E. B. Keeler. 2005. “Is Adjuvant Therapy
for Older Patients with Node (-) Early Breast Cancer
Cost-Effective?” Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology
53 (1): 81–89.
Nguyen, L. H., W. Laohasiriwong, J. F. Stewart, P. Wright,
Y. T. B. Nguyen, and P. C. Coyte. 2013. “Cost-effectiveness
Analysis of a Screening Program for Breast Cancer in
Vietnam.” Value in Health Regional Issues 2: 21–28.
Norum, J., V. Angelsen, E. Wist, and J. A. Olsen. 1996.
“Treatment Costs in Hodgkin’s Disease: A Cost-Utility
Analysis.” European Journal of Cancer 32A (9): 1510–17.
Norum, J., J. A. Olsen and E. A. Wist. 1997. “Lumpectomy or
mastectomy? Is breast conserving surgery too expensive?”
Breast Cancer Research and Treatment 45 (1): 7–14.
Okonkwo, Q. L., G. Draisma, A. der Kinderen, M. L. Brown,
and H. J. de Koning. 2008. “Breast Cancer Screening Policies
in Developing Countries: A Cost-Effectiveness Analysis for
India.” Journal of the National Cancer Institute 100 (18):
1290–1300.
Ozawa, S., A. Mirelman, M. L. Stacka, D. G. Walker, and
O. S. Levine. 2012. “Cost-Effectiveness and Economic
Benefits of Vaccines in Low- and Middle-Income Countries:
A Systematic Review.” Vaccine 31: 108–96.
Park, S. M., Y. H. Yun, and S. Kwon. 2005. “Feasible Economic
Strategies to Improve Screening Compliance for Colorectal
Cancer in Korea.” World Journal of Gastroenterology
11: 1587–93.
Pignone, M., L. Russell, and J. Wagner, eds. 2005. Economic
Models of Colorectal Cancer Screening in Average-Risk Adults.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Praditsitthikorn, N., Y. Teerawattananon, S. Tantivess,
S. Limwattananon, A. Riewpaiboon, and others. 2011.
“Economic Evaluation of Policy Options for Prevention and
Control of Cervical Cancer in Thailand.” Pharmacoeconomics
29 (9): 781–806.

Cancer in Low- and Middle-Income Countries: An Economic Overview

279

Ramsey, S. D., Z. Liu, R. Boer, S. D. Sullivan, J. Malin,
and others. 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness of Primary versus
Secondary Prophylaxis with Pegfilgrastim in Women with
Early-Stage Breast Cancer Receiving Chemotherapy.” Value
in Health 12 (2): 217–25.
Reid, S. 2012. “Estimating the Burden of Disease from Unsafe
Injections in India: A Cost-Benefit Assessment of the AutoDisable Syringe in a Country with Low Blood-Borne Virus
Prevalence.” Indian Journal of Community Medicine 37 (2):
89–94. doi:10.4103/0970-0218.96093.
Rodgers, M., M. Soares, D. Epstein, H. Yang, D. Fox, and
others. 2011. “Bevacizumab in Combination with a
Taxane for the First-Line Treatment of HER2-Negative
Metastatic Breast Cancer.” Health Technology Assessment
1: 1–12.
Salomon, J. A., N. Carvalho, C. Gutiérrez-Delgado, R. Orozco,
A. Mancuso, and others. 2012. “Intervention Strategies
to Reduce the Burden of Non-Communicable Diseases
in Mexico: Cost Effectiveness Analysis.” British Medical
Journal 344: e355.
Sloan, F. A., and H. Gelband, eds. 2007. Opportunities for
Cancer Control in Low- and Middle-Income Countries.
Washington, DC: National Academies Press.
Smith, R. D., J. Hall, H. Gurney, and P. R. Harnett. 1993.
“A Cost-Utility Approach to the Use of 5-Fluorouracil
and Levamisole as Adjuvant Chemotherapy for Dukes’ C
Colonic Carcinoma.” Medical Journal of Australia 158 (5):
319–22.
Speight, P. M., S. Palmer, D. R. Moles, M. C. Downer,
D. H. Smith, and others. 2006. “The Cost-Effectiveness
of Screening for Oral Cancer in Primary Care.” Health
Technology Assessment 10 (14): 1–144.
Starling, N., D. Tilden, J. White, and D. Cunningham. 2007.
“Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Cetuximab/Irinotecan vs
Active/Best Supportive Care for the Treatment of Metastatic
Colorectal Cancer Patients Who Have Failed Previous
Chemotherapy Treatment.” British Journal of Cancer 96 (2):
206–12.
Subramanian, S., R. Sankaranarayanan, B. Bapat, T. Somanathan,
G. Thomas, and others. 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness of Oral
Cancer Screening: Results from a Cluster Randomized
Controlled Trial in India.” Bulletin of the World Health
Organization 87 (3): 200–06.
Tappenden, P., R. Jones, S. Paisley, and C. Carroll. 2007.
“The Cost-Effectiveness of Bevacizumab in the First-Line
Treatment of Metastatic Colorectal Cancer in England and
Wales.” European Journal of Cancer 17 (2487): 2494.
Tsoi, K. K. F., S. S. M. Ng, M. C. M. Leung, and J. J. Y. Sung. 2008.
“Cost-Effectiveness Analysis on Screening for Colorectal
Neoplasm and Management of Colorectal Cancer in
Asia.” Alimentary Pharmacology and Therapeutics 28 (3):
353–63.
van den Brink, M., W. B. van den Hout, A. M. Stiggelbout,
E. Klein Kranenbarg, C. A. Marijnen, and others. 2004.

280

Cancer

“Cost-Utility Analysis of Preoperative Radiotherapy in
Patients with Rectal Cancer Undergoing Total Mesorectal
Excision: A Study of the Dutch Colorectal Cancer Group.”
Journal of Clinical Oncology 22 (2): 244–53.
van der Meij, E. H., P. D. Bezemer, and I. van der Waal.
2002. “Cost-Effectiveness of Screening for the Possible
Development of Cancer in Patients with Oral Lichen
Planus.” Community Dentistry and Oral Epidemiology
30 (5): 342–52.
van Litsenburg, R. R., C. A. Uyl-de Groot, H. Raat, G. J. Kaspers,
and R. J. Gemke. 2011. “Cost-Effectiveness of Treatment
of Childhood Acute Lymphoblastic Leukemia with
Chemotherapy Only: The Influence of New Medication
and Diagnostic Technology.” Pediatric Blood and Cancer
57 (6): 1005–10.
van Vlaenderen, I., J. L. Canon, V. Cocquyt, G. Jerusalem,
J. P. Machiels, and others. 2009. “Trastuzumab Treatment
of Early Stage Breast Cancer Is Cost-Effective from the
Perspective of the Belgian Health Care Authorities.” Acta
Clinica Belgica 64 (2): 100–12.
Vos, T., R. Carter, J. Barendregt, C. Mihalopoulos, L. Veerman,
A. Magnus, L. Cobiac, M. Bertram, and A. Wallace. 2010.
Assessing Cost-Effectiveness in Prevention: Final Report.
University of Queensland, Brisbane and Deakin University,
Melbourne.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2012. Assessing
National Capacity for the Prevention and Control of
Noncommunicable Diseases: Report of the 2010 Global
Survey. Geneva: WHO.
Wong, I. O. L., K. M. Kuntz, B. J. Cowling, C. L. K. Lam, and
G. M. Leung. 2007. “Cost Effectiveness of Mammography
Screening for Chinese Women.” Cancer 110 (885): 895.
Wong, S. S., A. P. K. Leong, and T. Z. Leong. 2004. “CostEffectiveness Analysis of Colorectal Cancer Screening
Strategies in Singapore: A Dynamic Decision Analytic
Approach.” Studies in Health Technology Information 107
(Pt 1): 104–10.
World Bank. 2013. World Databank. World Bank,
Washington, DC. http://databank.worldbank.org/data
/home.aspx.
Wu, G. H.-M., Y.-M. Wang, A. M.-F. Yen, J.-M. Wong, H.-C. Lai,
and others. 2006. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Colorectal
Cancer Screening with Stool DNA Testing in IntermediateIncidence Countries.” BMC Cancer 6: 136–48.
Yang, J. J., S. K. Park, L. Y. Cho, W. Han, B. Park, and
others. 2010. “Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of 5 Years of
Postoperative Adjuvant Tamoxifen Therapy for Korean
Women with Breast Cancer: Retrospective Cohort Study
of the Korean Breast Cancer Society Database.” Clinical
Therapeutics 32: 1122–38.
Zelle, S. G., K. M. Nyarko, W. K. Bosu, M. Aikins, L. M. Niëns,
and others. 2012. “Costs, Effects and Cost-Effectiveness of
Breast Cancer Control in Ghana.” Tropical Medicine and
International Health 17: 1031–43.

Chapter

17

Financing Cancer Care in
Low-Resource Settings
Felicia Knaul, Susan Horton, Pooja Yerramilli,
Hellen Gelband, and Rifat Atun

INTRODUCTION
Cancer accounts for a rapidly growing health and
economic burden in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs) (Knaul and others 2014). The long-term
nature of chronic and noncommunicable diseases that
characterizes many cancers inflicts repeated financial
onslaughts on families, intensifying the poverty-illness
cycle. Inadequately treated illnesses deepen poverty,
leading to a cycle of loss of health, lack of treatment,
higher morbidity, lost income, and deeper impoverishment (Atun and Knaul 2012).
Many LMICs are working to achieve greater, and
even universal, financial protection in health care, with
funding from domestic sources that combines public
insurance and prepayment. Establishing universal
entitlement to key services through guaranteed benefits packages is a cornerstone of these efforts. These
countries face challenges as they strive to include cancer
and other chronic and noncommunicable diseases in
the package of covered services. The inclusion of cancer
interventions poses a specific set of challenges because
of the chronic nature of the illness and the high costs
of treatment.
An effective response to cancer requires strengthening all health system functions—stewardship, financing,
service provision and delivery, and resource generation—
along the entire, six-component, care-control
continuum—primary and secondary prevention,

diagnosis, treatment, survivorship, rehabilitation, and
palliative care and pain control (Hewitt, Greenfield,
and Stovall 2005; Knaul, Alleyne, and others 2012).
The failure to adequately manage one of the components
can jeopardize the entire response, resulting in premature deaths, unnecessary pain, and wasted resources.
Although responding to all facets of the continuum is
a daunting task, several countries have included cancer
care in recent reforms designed to achieve universal
health coverage (UHC); these reforms provide useful
lessons for other countries.
This chapter analyzes one health system function—
financing—in relation to cancer, focusing on treatment. The analysis draws on experiences from several
middle-income countries (MICs) in which domestic
finance is used and efforts are underway to achieve
universal coverage. We draw lessons for other components of cancer care and control and highlight the
importance of developing strategies for financing that
consider all aspects of the care continuum and strengthening of health systems.
Our analysis focuses on how domestic sources of
funding are deployed to finance cancer care; we leave
for later work the issues of how these funds are sourced
and collected. Domestic funding in the vast majority
of LMICs does, and will inevitably continue to, pay
for the bulk of cancer care. We do not focus on global
and regional financing and platforms; this is a topic for
future research. These platforms are especially important

Corresponding author: Felicia Knaul, PhD, Director, Miami Institute for the Americas, and Professor, Miller School of Medicine, University of Miami, Florida,
United States, fknaul@miami.edu.

281

sources of finance for the poorest countries, for catalyzing discovery and innovation and for aggregating
demand to reduce the costs of medicines and vaccines.

FINANCIAL PROTECTION, HEALTH
FINANCING, AND CANCER CARE1
The set of diseases that we call cancer leads to some of the
most problematic financial issues in providing care for
chronic and noncommunicable diseases. Some cancers
can be prevented by changing behaviors or by controlling cancer-associated infections. For other cancers
whose causes are unknown, the only effective control
comes from early detection and treatment. Even where
the causes are known and somewhat controllable, early
detection and treatment remain the best course for cancers that are not prevented. For some cancers, especially
those detected at later stages, even the most advanced
treatments are not effective and palliation is the appropriate course of action (Gralow and others 2012).
Cancer often requires relatively expensive, complex, multimodal medical treatment for extended periods, leading to household impoverishment, treatment
abandonment, and, too often, poor outcomes, especially if the disease is detected at a later stage or
patients cannot adhere to a full regime of treatment.
Yet many interventions for cancer are both effective and
cost-effective according to today’s global metrics. Recent
discoveries have made it possible to prevent several of
the infection-associated cancers that disproportionately
affect poor people because of their exposure to communicable diseases and lack of access to early detection of
precancerous lesions. For example, vaccinating against
the human papillomavirus (HPV) can prevent the most
common cervical cancers, the vast majority of which
occur in LMICs.

Need for Financial Protection
Acute care costs, even for simple ailments, can push
already poor families deeper into poverty. The repeated
and ongoing costs of a chronic illness are more
devastating. India provides an example of the substantial financial vulnerability of households to noncommunicable diseases, especially cancer. In India, the
share of out-of-pocket health expenditure devoted to
noncommunicable diseases increased from 33 percent
to almost 50 percent from 1995 to 2004. The cost of
a single stay for cancer or heart disease in a public
hospital is the equivalent of 40–50 percent of gross
domestic product (GDP) per capita (Mahal, Karan, and
Engelgau 2010). As a result, cancer-affected households

282

Cancer

derive over 30 percent of annual inpatient expenditures
from borrowing and asset sales, which is significantly
greater than the reliance on these funding mechanisms
by unaffected households (Mahal and others 2013). In
South Asia, the probability of incurring catastrophic
health expenditure from hospitalization is 1.6 times
higher for cancer than for a communicable disease,
such as pneumonia (Engelgau and others 2010; Nikolic,
Stanciole, and Zaydman 2011).
One of the most insidious aspects of this illnessimpoverishment cycle is that for many patients, out-ofpocket spending is wasted because it contributes nothing
to improved health. Especially in LMICs, cancer is often
detected so late that even the most effective treatment
will not effect a long-term cure. Second, a substantial
proportion of what is spent by patients buys low-quality
or inappropriate care that is ineffective. Third, care may
be coupled with prohibitive transportation costs and
investments of time that include long waits to access
care. These difficulties are more likely to occur with a
disease such as cancer, where care often requires repeated
travel and months-long treatment.
Cancer Care Financing
In all LMICs, most of the financing for cancer care
and control is, and will continue to be, from domestic
sources. This is especially true for MICs where external
financing is 1 percent or less of total health expenditure.
An important exception is the poorest and most aiddependent countries. However, even countries as poor as
Ethiopia, Haiti, and Niger rely on domestic funding for
more than 50 percent of their total health expenditures.
The World Health Organization (WHO) estimated that
in 2008, external sources covered 16.4 percent of total
health expenditure in LMICs (WHO 2011a).
Domestic finance of health care comes from two
primary sources: (1) out-of-pocket spending by families,
either at the point of service or via private insurance
(the latter being much less common in LMICs), and
(2) public spending for health or broader social protection organized as public insurance. Out-of-pocket
spending by families is the least equitable and efficient
means of financing health systems and often leads to
impoverishment. Out-of-pocket expenditures as a share
of total health expenditures is highest in LMICs—
about 50 percent—and lowest in high-income countries
(HICs), averaging 14 percent (World Bank 2013). By
contrast, public financing or insurance schemes that
enable prepayment and pooling offer financial protection
from excessive expenditures for health care and can create
more effective and equitable ways of organizing health
system financing (Knaul and others 2006; WHO 2010).

The movement toward UHC is a transition to pooled,
publicly financed health care that offers financial protection to families and constitutes the scaffolding that
will support cancer coverage in LMICS. Achieving UHC
involves a process with overlapping stages, beginning
with enrollment and legal coverage, which entitles all
people to health services funded by publicly organized
insurance. The second stage is coverage that seeks to
guarantee access to a comprehensive package of health
services. The third stage is universal effective coverage
that guarantees the maximum attainable health results
from an appropriate package of high-quality services for
the evolving health needs of a population. UHC implies
financial protection that promotes equity and efficiency
and reduces the risk of financial shocks to families by
reducing out-of-pocket payments (Knaul, GonzálezPier, and others 2012).
Financial protection toward UHC can expand in
three ways and is often tied to growth in resources allocated to health and overall growth of country income:
• Expansion of prepayment and risk pooling over time
to cover entire populations, in some cases on a groupby-group basis
• Provision of a more comprehensive benefit package
of health interventions and covered conditions
• Expansion of risk pooling and financial risk protection through the elimination of out-of-pocket
expenses at the point of service delivery for the poor
and for those interventions considered of high value
where use should not be deterred (Jamison and
others 2013)
These three dimensions of coverage are summarized in WHO’s (2010) financing “cube” as height,
breadth, and depth. For a health system to achieve universal coverage, the height (proportion of the service
cost covered), breadth (covered services), and depth
(proportion of the population covered) must be taken
into account (WHO 2010). The goal of UHC, according
to WHO, is to ensure that all people are able to obtain
the health services that they need without suffering
financial hardship because they cannot afford to pay for
them (WHO 2012, 2013).
Country Approaches
The country-specific roadmap to UHC can take several
routes. One approach that has been strongly advocated
in the literature is what Gwatkin and Ergo term “progressive universalism” (2011), which refers to the determination to include people who are poor from the outset as
programs and policies to promote UHC are introduced.

Two major paths of progressive universalism have been
identified, both of which use prepayment and pooling
of funds to extend publicly financed insurance. The
first route drives the expansion of population coverage
and targets the poor by insuring health interventions
for diseases that place a high burden on this group,
with no co-payment for anyone. The second variant
begins with a larger package for the poor. The definition of the package is pivotal and based on burden of
disease. Recommendations include highly cost-effective
interventions for infectious diseases and reproductive,
maternal, newborn, and child health, as well as chronic
conditions and noncommunicable diseases. For cancer,
the package includes interventions for prevention, early
detection, treatment, and palliation, focusing on those
cancers of highest burden and interventions of greatest
potential effectiveness, especially for the poor (Jamison
and others 2013).
In practice, countries have tended to apply a
combined or iterative approach, depending on the
point of departure to UHC. The point of departure
is often a political issue and largely determined by
existing institutional arrangements and the availability of resources. Mexico’s Seguro Popular design, for
example, is based on universal population coverage
with no co-payment for community services, sliding
scale prepayment for personal health services that
exempts the poor, and universal population coverage
without prepayment for catastrophic illness; all of
these elements are anchored in an expanding benefit
package of cost-effective services that includes an
increasing number of cancers. A related approach
focused on enhancing equity in Turkey has been analyzed in detail (Atun and others 2013).
Cancer—because it encompasses a set of chronic and
complex diseases—challenges the limits of UHC and
the pathways to progressive universalism. A defining
characteristic of most cancers and many other chronic
diseases is the need, on a population level, for a series
of interventions along the care-control continuum and
illness lifecycle.
Analyzing the extent to which effective interventions
for specific cancers are covered along the continuum
provides insights into the depth and breadth of the overall package, as well as the balance between prevention
and treatment. To ensure effective coverage, the benefits
package needs to be guaranteed with permanent revenue sources and capacity-building commitments. Low
effective coverage—particularly of early detection—
is common, even in countries with relatively complete benefit packages. This situation compromises
final outcomes (Knaul, Chertorivski Woldenberg, and
Arreola-Ornelas 2012).

Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings

283

PATHS TO UNIVERSAL HEALTH CARE
FINANCING
Countries are following different paths to UHC. Some
countries, mostly of middle income, in Latin America
and the Caribbean (Colombia, the Dominican Republic,
Mexico, and Peru, for example) have extended public
insurance to nonsalaried workers, the unemployed, those
out of the labor force, and the poor; these countries are
making adjustments to equalize benefits across groups.
Thailand has followed a similar path, beginning in 2002,
and India is beginning this process. China has extended
coverage of the national medical insurance program
widely, but with a high co-payment and no coverage for
catastrophic expenditures. LMICs in Sub-Saharan Africa
(such as Ghana) face much greater resource constraints,
and UHC tends to be associated with a more restricted
package of services. We illustrate some of the differences
and similarities among countries in their paths to UHC
by considering the specific case of introducing coverage
for cancer, focusing on treatment.
This section draws on case studies of eight countries:
China (Yerramilli and Jiang 2013), Colombia (Guerrero,
Amaris, and Yerramilli 2013), the Dominican Republic
(Rathe, Knaul, and Yerramilli 2013), Ghana (Yerramilli
and Ataguba 2013), India (Yerramilli 2013), Mexico
(Knaul, Chertorvski Woldenberg, and Arreola-Ornelas
2012), Peru (Seinfeld and Pleic 2013), and Thailand
(Yerramilli and Firestone 2013). The four case studies
from Latin America and the Caribbean are updates of
earlier case studies from Atun and Knaul (2012). Salient
details for the eight countries are summarized in table
17.1. Common themes and lessons emerge from these
experiences. Each country faces the challenge of including chronic, catastrophic illnesses such as cancer in the
package for rich and poor.
Health Insurance Coverage by Population Group
Health systems have historically built their financing
schemes around sources of funding rather than health
needs, often leaving the poor without access to pooled,
public financing systems or opportunities for prepayment. One of the core ideas of UHC and progressive
universalism is the determination to cover the poor first
and relieve this group of the burden of impoverishing
and catastrophic health spending.
In countries that finance their health systems
through health or social insurance, salaried workers
and government employees are typically the first to be
covered, financed by payroll deductions supplemented
by employer contributions. In many countries, this
group has access to superior social security health

284

Cancer

facilities, while all other groups (nonsalaried workers,
the unemployed, those outside the labor force, and
agricultural workers, all of whom tend to be poorer) are
limited to usually lower quality, public facilities (or those
provided by nongovernmental organizations) that may
have user fees and that often ration care by availability
and expertise. In such cases, medication costs are frequently paid out of pocket.
The path from this pattern of segmented coverage
to universal coverage has varied. Canada and many
countries in Europe (the United Kingdom and the
Nordic countries, for example) rely heavily on general
taxation revenue to finance the system; others more
strongly emphasize the contribution of private health
insurance, either voluntary or mandatory (Singapore
and the United States). Some countries, for example,
Germany, have brought together coverage of distinct
groups to reach comprehensive coverage.
The Lancet Commission on Investing in Health evaluated the extent to which the path toward increasing
coverage of different groups is universal and progressive
(Jamison and others 2013). In Latin America and the
Caribbean, where health care provision has been highly
segmented between those covered by social security and
those not, several countries have moved to invest in
publicly financed programs to extend pooled coverage,
focusing on the poor and nonsalaried workers, and to
reduce coverage differentials progressively.
Colombia adopted a universal social insurance plan
in the 1990s, with gradual implementation, and reached
universal coverage in 2011. This approach combined
the contributory plan for the formal sector (including
the self-employed) with coverage for the poor and the
informal sector. The cost for the subsidized scheme
is partly funded through general taxation, with some
cross-subsidization from contributions from salaried
workers and employers, with a convergence in per capita
expenditures between the two sectors (Guerrero, Amaris,
and Yerramilli 2013).
Mexico has more recently followed a similar path. The
health reform of 2003 led to the Seguro Popular de Salud
(SPS), which, by 2012, provided health coverage to more
than 52 million Mexicans who had been ineligible for
health care through the existing social security systems,
with coverage of a progressively expanding number of
interventions (Knaul, Chertorivski Woldenberg, and
Arreola-Ornelas 2012). The expansion of coverage
began with the poorest segments of the population. SPS
deliberately built on the platform of the anti-poverty
program Oportunidades and enhanced the coverage of
a package of covered services for the poor by expanding
the package (Frenk 2006; Knaul, González-Pier, and
others 2012).

Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings

285

Colombia
(upper-middleincome)

China
(upper-middleincome)

Country (World
Bank income
group)

• High-cost subaccount created
to pool risk among insurers
across entire population

• Universal social health
insurance system introduced in
early 1990s, with two schemes:
1. Contributory for formal
sector
2. Subsidized for informal
sector, unemployed, and
poor

• Various directives from the
Ministry of Health

• Medical Financial Assistance
Program (MFA) for the poor,
covers premiums, extra
expenses for programs 1–3

• Urban Residents Basic Medical
Insurance Scheme (URBMI)

• Urban Employee Basic Medical
Insurance Scheme (UEBMI)

• New Cooperative Medical
Scheme (NCMS)

Launched in early 2000s

Program/legal underpinning

• Contributory plan:
39%

• Subsidized plan: 51%

Universal as of 2011

MFA: 93.37 million poor
covered as of 2010

87% coverage in 2008
(72% urban, 93% rural)

Population coverage

• Coverage of
catastrophic
illness expanded
gradually, now
including some
cancers, with
others under
consideration

• Child vaccination,
cervical cancer
screening,
hospitalization,
chemotherapy,
radiotherapy,
and most cancer
drugs

All included
catastrophic diseases

Interventions
covered

• UEBMI and
URBMI reimburse
70% and 50%,
respectively,
of inpatient
expenditures

• Varies by county:
25% to 40% of
cost for cancer
covered in rural
counties

Percentage of cost
covered

• Treatment: hospitalization;
chemotherapy; radiotherapy;
and most cancer drugs,
including tamoxifen and
paclitaxel, rituximab, and
trastuzumab

• Screening: cervical, breast,
prostate, colorectal

Required coverage by
catastrophic disease insurance
(per Ministry of Health 2012
decree): childhood leukemia,
breast cancer, cervical cancer,
chronic lymphoid leukemia,
lung cancer, esophageal cancer,
colon cancer, and rectal cancer

Current cancer provisions

Table 17.1 Summary of Health Insurance Initiatives: China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ghana, India, Mexico, Peru, and Thailand

table continues next page

• Access still limited:
78% of breast cancers
diagnosed in advanced
stages

• Has protected
against catastrophic
expenditures (no details
in case study)

• Supplementary
insurance program too
new to be evaluated

• Increased access
by NCMS to health
services but no
improvement of
financial protection,
potentially because of
increasing costs of care

Impact

286

Cancer

National Health Insurance Act
(2003) established the National
Health Insurance Scheme (NHIS)

• Rashtriya Swasthya Bima
Yojana (RSBY) (national) and
several similar state programs,
for example, in Andhra Pradesh,
Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu

Ghana
(lower-middleincome)

India
(lower-middleincome)

• National Programme for
Prevention and Control
of Cancer, Diabetes,
Cardiovascular Diseases, and
Stroke (NPCDCS): 2010

• Rajeev Aarogyasri Scheme
(RAS): 2007, state of Andhra
Pradesh, for high-cost
treatments mainly for NCDs;
contributory health insurance
schemes run by RAS for
employed people

Compulsory, contributory, and
subsidized parts

Seguro Familiar de Salud: 2001 (full
implementation in 2007)

Program/legal underpinning

Dominican
Republic
(upper-middleincome)

Country (World
Bank income
group)

• NPCDCS: intention
to cover all by 2017;
more public health
focus, optimized
spending on
prevention, diagnosis,
treatment, and
palliation

• RSBY and RAS-like
programs targeted
to poorest, with per
family per year limits

• Premiums: sliding
scale with no payment
from poorest, but
not implemented in
practice

• All eligible, but only
34% enrolled as of
2010

2013: 29% covered by
contributory plan, 25% by
subsidized plan; intention
to reach universal
coverage

Population coverage

• Limits higher
for contributory
schemes

• Treatment
covered up
to Rs150,000
(US$2,430)
per family for
subsidized
coverage

• 100% covered,
including
premiums

Common, relatively
inexpensive
interventions, but
breast and cervical
cancer included

Explicit and
comprehensive
package of
community and
personal health
goods and services

Interventions
covered

• Contributory
scheme: up
to US$2,250
additional for
outpatient cancer
drugs

• Up to 1 million
pesos/person/
year (US$25,000
in 2013), with
20% to 30%
co-payment

Percentage of cost
covered

• Includes palliative care

• RAS: Some treatments for
head and neck cancers,
gastrointestinal tract
cancers, genitourinary
system cancers,
gynecological cancers,
soft tissue/bone tumors,
thoracic and mediastinum
cancers, breast cancer,
skin cancer, multiple
myeloma, hepatoblastoma,
Wilms tumor, childhood
B-cell lymphomas, AML,
ALL, ocular cancers,
histiocytosis, and
rhabdomyosarcoma

Breast and cervical cancer, with
Parliament considering adding
prostate and childhood cancers

table continues next page

No evaluation of coverage
or financial protection

• In 2005, 45% of
financing out of pocket,
including for services
that should be free

• Has had relatively little
effect on reducing
impoverishment caused
by medical care

• Almost half the
population without
coverage, so pay out of
pocket for all health care

• Intended to provide
financial protection, but
not yet clear whether
it has

• No evaluation; no
registry, so not possible
to evaluate impact on
survival

• Screening: Pap smear and
mammography
• Diagnosis, treatment,
physiotherapy,
rehabilitation, and palliative
care for adult and pediatric
cancers

Impact

Current cancer provisions

Table 17.1 Summary of Health Insurance Initiatives: China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ghana, India, Mexico, Peru, and Thailand (continued)

Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings

287

Peru
(upper-middleincome)

Mexico
(upper-middleincome)

Country (World
Bank income
group)

Universal Health Insurance Law
(Law 29,344, 2009) with mandatory
health insurance for all through one
of three plans: contributory, semicontributory, and subsidized

• Health Insurance XXI Century
(2013), for children under five
years of age

• Fund for Protection against
Catastrophic Expenses (FPCE)
national program

• Seguro Popular de Salud (SPS):
2004, for basic package for
all not eligible for preexisting
coverage through social
security (formal sector
employees)

Program/legal underpinning

• Basic package
covers 285
interventions

52 million previously
uninsured covered

Plan Esperanza (Project
Hope) for cancer to cover
all poor and vulnerable

June 2013:

2012:

• Health Solidarity
Intangible Fund
(FISSAL): covers
common cancers,
ESRD, rare
diseases

• Essential Health
Plan (no high-cost
treatment) for all

• FPCE covers 59
interventions
for 19 disease
groups

Interventions
covered

Population coverage

No out-of-pocket
payment for cancer
services

Percentage of cost
covered

• Includes health promotion,
prevention, early detection,
diagnosis, treatment, and
palliative care

• All costs covered for select
group of cancers: cervix,
breast, colon, stomach,
prostate, leukemia, and
lymphoma

Plan Esperanza (Project Hope),
cancer plan: 2012

Through FPCE: all childhood
cancers and cervical, breast,
testicular, prostate, NHL,
ovarian, and colorectal cancers

Current cancer provisions

table continues next page

• Decrease of out-ofpocket costs from 34%
in 2012 to 11% in the
first trimester of 2013,
for those in contributory
scheme

• 21,000 cancers treated
in first year at no
personal cost for
subsidized population

• Low abandonment rates

• 2006–09: increase of
treatment of childhood
cancers from 3%
to 55%; three-year
survival, 55% for ALL
and 75% for HL

• Catastrophic spending
decrease of more
than 20% among SPS
enrollees; overall outof-pocket spending
decrease for poorest
households

Impact

Table 17.1 Summary of Health Insurance Initiatives: China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ghana, India, Mexico, Peru, and Thailand (continued)

288

Cancer

• 2002: National Health Security
Act, establishing the Universal
Coverage Scheme (UCS)

Thailand
(upper-middleincome)

• SSS and WCS
together: 15% of
population covered

• CSMBS: 7% of
population covered

• UCS: 76% of
population covered

Population coverage
UCS: inpatient
and outpatient
services, such as
free prescription
medicines,
ambulatory care,
hospitalization,
disease prevention,
and health promotion

Interventions
covered
100% of services
covered

Percentage of cost
covered

• Royal Thai Government
issuance of compulsory
licenses for four cancer
drugs: letrozole, docetaxel,
erlotinib, and imatinib

• UCS coverage of
radiotherapy and
chemotherapy, as well as
surgeries and critical care
for emergency patients

• Breast self-examination
promotion

• Cervical cancer screening
(Pap smear and VIA): special
FFS payment to incentivize
use

Current cancer provisions

• Screening rates for
cervical and breast
cancer quite low

• No increase in hospital
sales of anti-cancer
drugs after five years,
despite increases in
other NCD drugs (for
example, for diabetes,
blood pressure, and
cholesterol)

Impact

Sources: Based on Guerrero, Amaris, and Yerramilli 2013; Knaul, Chertorivski Woldenberg, and Arreola-Ornelas 2012; Rathe, Knaul, and Yerramilli 2013; Seinfeld and Pleic 2013; Yerramilli 2013; Yerramilli and Ataguba 2013; Yerramilli and Firestone
2013; Yerramilli and Jiang 2013.
Note: ALL = acute lymphoblastic leukemia; AML = acute myeloid leukemia; ESRD = end-stage renal disease; FFS = fee-for-service; HL = Hodgkin’s lymphoma; NCD = noncommunicable disease; NHL = non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma; VIA = visual inspection
with acetic acid.

• Prior to 2002:
a. Civil Servants Medical
Benefits Scheme (CSMBS)
b. Social Security Scheme
(SSS)
c. Worker Compensation
Scheme (WCS)

Program/legal underpinning

Country (World
Bank income
group)

Table 17.1 Summary of Health Insurance Initiatives: China, Colombia, Dominican Republic, Ghana, India, Mexico, Peru, and Thailand (continued)

Peru’s Health Insurance Law of 2009 provided coverage for nonsalaried workers through a semi-contributory
plan and for the poor through a highly subsidized plan
that includes vulnerable groups, such as children and
elderly persons. Salaried workers continue to be covered
through a preexisting plan (Seinfeld and Pleic 2013).
Similarly, the Dominican Republic introduced a law
in 2001 (establishing the Seguro Familiar de Salud) and
commenced implementation in 2007, with the aim of
comprehensive coverage within a decade. As of 2013,
54 percent of the population had achieved coverage,
with slightly over 54 percent of this group in the contributory scheme and the remaining 46 percent in the
subsidized scheme (Rathe, Knaul, and Yerramilli 2013).
Many other countries in Latin America and the
Caribbean have not yet adopted pro-poor health insurance policies and programs, and coverage remains more
segmented.
In the MICs of Asia included in our review, coverage
is less complete than in many countries in Latin America
and the Caribbean. Singapore, now an HIC, has a scheme
with greater reliance on private insurance, including a
separate catastrophic insurance scheme (Medishield) in
addition to the mandatory regular insurance (Medisave)
and the scheme for the poor (Medifund) (Haseltine
2013). The Singapore scheme has been held up as a
good example. However, Shanghai briefly experimented
with a similar model and discontinued it (Dong 2003).
The problems in Shanghai included poor control of
incentives for doctors and hospitals to provide expensive treatments and extreme cases where households
exhausted the limits of their insurance and were unable
to pay hospital bills and bury their deceased relatives.
These experiences suggest that what can work in a small,
high-income urban country or city is not necessarily
replicable in other settings.
Thailand passed the National Health Security Act in
2002, integrating five existing schemes and extending
coverage to workers in the informal sector (Yerramilli
and Firestone 2013). The scheme covering the poor,
the Voluntary Health Card, was expanded following the
financial crisis in 1997.
In 2003, the Chinese government began covering rural residents and nonworking urban residents
(including students, children, and elderly and disabled
persons) by adding programs to existing schemes
for urban public and private sector employees. This
expansion increased national insurance coverage from
23 percent in 2003 to 87 percent in 2008 (72 percent
of urban residents and 93 percent of rural residents)
(Yerramilli and Jiang 2013) and to 97 percent by 2011
(Goss and others 2014). The main group remaining
uncovered consists of rural migrants to urban areas,

who do not have rights of residence. They are covered by medical insurance in their place of origin
but do not have access to doctors where they work
(Goss and others 2014). The scheme for the formal
sector is financed by payroll taxes; the other schemes
require individual fixed contributions, supplemented
by contributions from various levels of government.
The local autonomy in program design has resulted
in some variations in the services covered by county
(Yerramilli and Jiang 2013).
In India, as elsewhere, schemes have existed to cover
salaried workers and their families. A national scheme
for the poor was instituted in 2008, covering treatment
up to a relatively low annual expenditure limit. However,
there is no national program for informal sector workers. Some states, such as Andhra Pradesh, Karnataka,
and Tamil Nadu, have developed schemes with broader
entitlement (Yerramilli 2013).
Ghana is one of the few Sub-Saharan African countries with a national health insurance system, which was
introduced in 2003. In theory, coverage is comprehensive,
with payroll contributions from formal sector workers,
contributions from informal sector workers on a sliding
scale, contributions from the poor, and exemptions for
the core poor (Yerramilli and Ataguba 2013). In practice,
informal sector workers pay the minimum contribution
and a small percentage of the poor is exempted from
contributions. With donor contributions, the scheme
ran at a deficit in 2010 and 2011 (Yerramilli and Ataguba
2013). The Ghana case illustrates some of the issues
facing ambitious schemes in LMICs.
Health Insurance Coverage by Services and
Conditions Covered
The second dimension of coverage is breadth—by
services and diseases included. All health insurance
schemes have restrictions on which medical services
are eligible for coverage; how these are determined
crucially affects the equity and efficiency of a health
system. Cost-effectiveness, population health needs, and
funding should define the package of covered services.
In turn, the package defines entitlement, especially once
universal enrollment is achieved, which tends to become
less restrictive as country income increases. A shallow
package, even if it covers a large proportion of the population, is unlikely to offer protection from financial
catastrophe or to lower financial barriers to accessing
care, particularly for cancer.
Cancer coverage often comes later in the development of these schemes. In LMICs, coverage has tended
to start with cancers that affect children and women and
that are curable with access and adherence to treatment.

Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings

289

Poor quality of care, incomplete services, or waiting
times can force many patients to seek care in the private
sector and pay out of pocket, especially for medications,
even though these are officially covered by insurance.
Because treatment typically involves the repeated use of
chemotherapeutic agents, waiting can severely reduce
the effectiveness of treatment or block access entirely.
Further, the package of covered services may not include
components that are important for accessing or managing care, such as transport costs or medications to control symptoms. Similarly, some essential treatments or
services (for example, radiotherapy) may be unavailable
in the public sector, preventing patients from accessing
a complete package of care. This situation can severely
reduce the efficacy of the package of provided treatment.
In Colombia, for example, cancer was not included
when the program started in 1994. A year later, some
cancer interventions were added. Screening for four
cancers was added in 2000, radiotherapy was added
in 2010, and mammography and breast biopsies were
added in 2012. Until 2012, fewer services were covered
under the subsidized scheme than under the contributory scheme, and access to treatment has often been an
issue because of geographic isolation (Guerrero, Amaris,
and Yerramilli 2013).
Mexico has a fund for protection against catastrophic
expenses that has gradually covered more cancer interventions since 2003 (Knaul, Chertorivski Woldenberg,
and Arreola-Ornelas 2012; Knaul, González-Pier, and
others 2012). Initially, coverage was provided for acute
lymphoblastic leukemia in children; this coverage has
subsequently been extended to certain cervical, breast,
and prostate cancers in adults. The package of covered services is based on cost-effectiveness criteria but
includes some expensive components (breast cancer
treatment, for example, includes trastuzumab for HER2positive patients).
Peru, which has a separate fund to provide for catastrophic illnesses, launched Project Hope as part of a
national cancer plan in 2012 (Seinfeld and Pleic 2013).
In the Dominican Republic, coverage of cancer is at
an early stage and specifies a fixed per capita sum for
financial protection. The more advanced treatments are
provided in the private sector; although there is some
coverage from the new insurance scheme, co-payments
remain relatively high (25–30 percent). New public
sector facilities are under development (Rathe, Knaul,
and Yerramilli 2013).
In Thailand, the government has aimed to expand
access to cancer treatment and, in addition to coverage, has obtained compulsory licenses for four cancer
medications: letrozole, docetaxel, erlotinib, and imatinib (Yerramilli and Firestone 2013). Thailand also has

290

Cancer

proactive policies to tax alcohol and tobacco; it uses
the proceeds to help fund the Thai Health Promotion
Foundation (ThaiHealth), which has been involved in
comprehensive campaigns to reduce smoking (Yerramilli
and Firestone 2013).
China is at an earlier stage of expanding cancer treatment packages. The central government required local
schemes to provide coverage for treatment of specified
catastrophic illnesses, including six types of cancer, as
of February 2013 (Yerramilli and Jiang 2013). However,
because medications are not generally covered by insurance, and because of high co-payments, the extent of
financial protection remains limited.
Although publicly funded insurance in India, particularly for the poor, is expanding, coverage in practice
remains limited. In several states, including Andhra
Pradesh, Karnataka, and Tamil Nadu, coverage is limited
to third-level care and the treatments included in the
packages may not be the most effective or cost-effective
for the condition (Yerramilli 2013). Primary and secondary cancer prevention is largely piecemeal and organized by hospitals and nongovernmental organizations.
However, a national program that aims to expand
access to and coverage of noncommunicable disease
prevention, including cancer education and screening,
is in the initial stages of implementation (Yerramilli
2013). Several cancer drugs are available at modest cost
in India, for historic reasons and because of the large
domestic pharmaceutical industry (Goss and others
2014), providing some relief to cancer patients.
In Sub-Saharan Africa, coverage for cancer is more
limited still. The Ghana National Health Insurance
Scheme is restricted to the more common and inexpensive procedures, and the only cancer coverage is
for breast and cervical cancer (Blanchet, Fink, and
Osei-Akoto 2012). Ghana signed a memorandum with
aid partners in 2007 to commence screening for breast
cancer using mammograms; however, this screening
program has not yet been implemented (Bosu 2012).
Level of Financial Protection for Cancer Services
The third dimension of coverage is whether (and how
much) patients and families contribute out of pocket
for services covered. Financial protection—based on
prepayment, risk pooling, and public funding for the
poor—is a cornerstone of efforts to achieve UHC and is
the goal of many health system reforms.
Most countries recognize that public and community
health services are of the highest priority and should
be universally available and fully and publicly funded.
Following experiences with reforms where basic public
health services, such as vaccination, suffered because

funding was not explicitly protected (as in Colombia),
countries have developed strategies to offer protected
financing for all covered interventions in this rubric
(Estevez 2012). In Mexico, Seguro Popular includes a
separate and protected fund (Knaul, González-Pier, and
others 2012). Still, it has been challenging to build into
UHC the mechanisms through which these funds grow
in tandem with public and community health services,
especially with the availability of new interventions to
treat or prevent disease. A clear example is the HPV vaccine, which is essential to the future prevention of cervical and several other cancers that are infection associated
and much more common in LMICs.
Offering public financing for disease prevention
and health-promoting services is important, given the
importance of lifestyle and early detection in managing
many cancers, including those that most burden LMICs.
Patients tend to underuse these services, especially
patients who are not fully informed or aware of the risks
of unhealthy behavior or late detection; this underuse is
exacerbated if they also face significant barriers to access.
Co-payments
The effectiveness of co-payments has been debated
for decades, because any degree of co-payment can
deter patients from seeking care. Further, implementing exemptions that target the poor sounds simple
but, in fact, it is difficult to achieve. For these reasons,
many proponents advocate the use of taxes as the more
effective and equitable means of generating revenue
for financing health. UHC initiatives tend to promote
sliding-scale prepayments rather than co-payment at
point of service.
Co-payments generally fall as country per capita
income increases, but they exist even in HICs. Many
LMICs, especially the poorest countries, rely heavily on
co-payments. In the LICs of Sub-Saharan Africa—with
some notable and recent exceptions, such as Rwanda—
public resources for cancer treatment and care are
severely limited and co-payments are the norm.
Co-payments often vary by type of service, being
smaller (or zero) for services at facilities, but very large
(even 100 percent) for medications. In China, the design
varies by county, but co-payments of 60–80 percent can
be required (Yerramilli and Jiang 2013). Many countries
set explicit limits on annual coverage per person or per
household (for example, India’s national scheme for
the poor and China), such that treatment for cancer is
likely to exhaust benefits and require large out-of-pocket
expenditures.
Thailand is unusual in that services provided by the
government sector do not require co-payment, including prescription drugs (Yerramilli and Firestone 2013).

China has begun to identify priority diseases for the
reduction of co-payments, focusing on inpatient services.
As of 2013, childhood and chronic myeloid leukemia, as
well as breast, cervical, lung, esophageal, gastric, and colorectal cancers, were included in these programs (Goss
and others 2014).

COVERAGE OF CANCER CARE: EARLY
RESULTS
For cancer especially, it takes time for the benefits of
improved coverage to translate into increased use of services and then to improvements in health. Unlike adding
a vaccination or a medication for an infectious disease,
adding cancer services to meet new demand may require
new facilities and infrastructure, specially trained medical personnel, and the trust of patients and providers.
Without these elements, access to care will not improve,
even if it is formally part of an insurance or health care
program. We report on a few results of improved coverage that have been recorded in the case study countries.
It is important to note that data on the impacts on
health—cancer survival or years of healthy life lived—
are almost impossible to obtain for the financing of
cancer treatment. In some cases, reforms are too recent
to show this degree of impact. In most cases, a major
limiting factor is the lack of data in the form of cancer
registries and a dearth of formal evaluation efforts.

Outcomes
Improvements in access and financial protection have
been documented for the more comprehensive reforms
and those of longer duration, although few formal evaluations have assessed health outcomes.
Thailand has made explicit efforts to increase care
availability, for example, by issuing compulsory licenses
for some cancer drugs, expanding the number of medical school graduates, and offering incentives to doctors
to practice in rural areas (WHO 2011b). Thailand also
explicitly allocates a fixed per capita amount to prevention, which is given to communities for local efforts, in
addition to national programs undertaken by the Thai
Health Promotion Foundation (Yerramilli and Firestone
2013). Despite these efforts, less than 20 percent of
eligible women have been screened for cervical cancer
(Leetongin 2011).
In Mexico, improved coverage has translated to
improved survival rates for some pediatric cancers
and lower treatment abandonment rates than elsewhere in the region. For breast cancer, the introduction of SPS was associated with reduced treatment

Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings

291

abandonment rates at the National Cancer Institute.
Incidence of catastrophic spending has decreased, as
has out-of-pocket expenditure by the poor (Knaul,
Chertorivski Woldenberg, and Arreola-Ornelas 2012;
Knaul, González-Pier, and others 2012).
There is a clear need for evaluation of programs
as they mature, measuring health outcomes as well as
process outcomes.

Incentives
The design of a financing system may create unintended
or intended incentives. In India, the annual cap on payments in the scheme covering the poor means that private
cancer care providers have an incentive to move patients
to the public sector once the benefits have been exhausted
(Yerramilli 2013). In Latin America and the Caribbean,
the relatively high payroll taxes on formal sector employment were a concern in the 1980s and blamed for holding down the size of the formal employment sector and
increasing informal employment. Similar issues can arise
if nonsalaried and own-account workers become entitled
to the same health benefits as salaried workers, without
being required to pay similar payroll taxes. These pitfalls
need to be recognized in system design to meet efficiency
needs as well as to improve equity.
In Colombia, the access to and use of health services
by the poor have improved (Giedion and Uribe 2009).
A concerning development, however, is that patients and
their families are successfully suing the government to
demand coverage of expensive but ineffective cancer treatments, including those for late-stage cancers (Guerrero,
Amaris, and Yerramilli 2013). Open-ended constitutional
and programmatic rights, combined with the desperation
of patients and families, and the financial benefits for producers of on-patent drugs and expensive services provide
strong financial incentives. These costly interventions may
deplete available funding for the national cancer fund and
undermine the financing of the health system (Guerrero,
Amaris, and Yerramilli 2013).
Incentives to provide care are also affected by whether
payments to service providers are made on a capitation
or fee-for-service basis. Some insurance schemes pay
on a fee-for-service basis for interventions that the
government wishes to promote, for example, cervical
cancer screening in Thailand (Srithamrongswat and
others 2010). Private sector providers are reimbursed for
other services on a capitation basis, with a global budget
ceiling based on Diagnosis Related Groups to contain
costs (Garebedian and others 2012). In China in the
past, fee-for-service payment provided hospitals with
the incentive to offer expensive treatments to end-stage

292

Cancer

cancer patients, although the treatments were futile.
In the Republic of Korea, fee-for-service payments for
screening tests for colorectal cancer are used, but the
reimbursement rates are not consistent with the pattern
of cost. Reimbursement rates for colonoscopy are set too
low relative to fecal occult blood tests, making colonoscopy, on the one hand, more cost-effective than it would
otherwise be, but, on the other hand, providing a disincentive for its provision by service providers (Park, Yun,
and Kwon 2005).

CONCLUSIONS
In many LMICs, health financing reform efforts have
much in common. Key elements include developing
contributory and subsidized plans for various population groups, meeting the challenges of incorporating
and financing nonsalaried workers and the poor, and
building on basic services associated with social welfare
programs.
Countries working toward UHC have established
universal entitlements to key services through guaranteed benefits packages. The countries are striving to
include interventions for common cancers and other
chronic and noncommunicable diseases for which there
are effective interventions.
Our review of the experiences in several LMICs suggests that these challenges can be met with well-designed
financing reform. Prevention, early detection, treatment,
and palliative care interventions for cancer can be effectively integrated into basic service packages covered
by a combination of social insurance and tax-financed
schemes. Invariably, cancer comes after other basic
services have been covered, but this can happen relatively
quickly—within a decade of program initiation.
In several countries, for example, Mexico and
Singapore, specific and distinct funds were established
to cover personal health services and catastrophic
expenses. In China and India, the design of public
insurance provides for some coverage, yet treatment
expense ceilings leave the population vulnerable to
catastrophic health expenses. Some countries, such as
Ghana, have used earmarked taxes or levies to derive
resources for health. In all cases, UHC coverage is built
up over time, adding covered populations and services
and covering a greater proportion of costs, particularly
catastrophic costs.
Cancer epitomizes why investment in a systems
approach to chronic diseases in LMICs is strategic.
The expansion of services and interventions discussed
in other chapters can be realized only if countries
develop appropriate financing and insurance systems.

Linking each component of the cancer care control continuum in an integrated financing plan is challenging
but necessary to guarantee the effectiveness of national
cancer programs.

NOTES
World Bank Income Classifications as of July 2014 are as follows, based on estimates of gross national income (GNI) per
capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries (LICs) = US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries (MICs) are subdivided:
a) lower-middle-income = US$1,046 to US$4,125
b) upper-middle-income (UMICs) = US$4,126 to US$12,745
High-income countries (HICs) = US$12,746 or more.
1. This section is based on Atun and Knaul (2012).

REFERENCES
Atun, R., S. Aydin, S. Chakraborty, S. Sümer, M. Aran, and
others. 2013. “Universal Health Coverage in Turkey:
Enhancement of Equity.” The Lancet 382 (9886): 65–99.
doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(13)61051-X.
Atun, R., and F. M. Knaul. 2012. “Innovative Financing: Local
and Global Opportunities.” In Closing the Cancer Divide:
An Equity Imperative, edited by F. M. Knaul, J. R. Gralow,
R. Atun, and A. Bhadalia, 257–88. Cambridge, MA: Harvard
Global Equity Initiative and Harvard University Press.
Blanchet, N. J., G. Fink, and I. Osei-Akoto. 2012. “The Effect of
Ghana’s National Health Insurance Scheme on Health Care
Utilisation.” Ghana Medical Journal 46 (2): 76–84.
Bosu, W. K. 2012. “A Comprehensive Review of the Policy and
Programmatic Response to Chronic Non-Communicable
Disease in Ghana.” Ghana Medical Journal 46 (2 Suppl):
69–78.
Dong, W. 2003. “Healthcare-Financing Reforms in Transitional
Society: A Shanghai Experience.” Journal of Health,
Population and Nutrition 21 (3): 223–34.
Engelgau, M., K. Okamoto, K. Navaratne, and S. Gopalan.
2010. “Prevention and Control of Selected Chronic NCDs
in Sri Lanka: Policy Options and Action Plan.” Health,
Nutrition and Population Discussion Paper, World
Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank
.org/HEALTHNUTRITIONANDPOPULATION/Resources
/281627-1095698140167/NCDsSriLanka.pdf.
Estevez, R. 2012. “The Quest for Equity in Latin America: A
Comparative Analysis of the Health Care Reforms in Brazil
and Colombia.” International Journal of Equity and Health
11 (6). http://www.equityhealthj.com/content/11/1/6. doi:
10.1186/1475-9276-11-6.
Frenk, J. 2006. “Bridging the Divide: Global Lessons from
Evidence-Based Health Policy in Mexico.” The Lancet 368
(9539): 954–61.

Garebedian, L. F., D. Ross-Degnan, S. Ratanawijitrasin,
P. Stephens, and A. K. Wagner. 2012. “Impact of Universal
Health Insurance Coverage in Thailand on Sales and Market
Share of Medicines for Non-Communicable Diseases: An
Interrupted Time Series Study.” British Medical Journal
Open 1: e001686.
Giedion, U., and M. Uribe. 2009. “Colombia’s Universal Health
Insurance System.” Health Affairs 28 (3): 853–63.
Goss, P. E., K. Strasser-Weippl, B. L. Lee-Bychkovsky, L. Fan,
J. Lie, and others. 2014. “Challenges to Effective Cancer
Control in China, India and Russia.” Lancet Oncology
15: 489–538.
Gralow, J. R., E. Krakauer, B. O. Anderson, A. Ilbawi, P. Porter,
and others. 2012. “Core Elements for Provision of Cancer
Care and Control in Low and Middle Income Countries.” In
Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited by
F. M. Knaul, J. R. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadalia, 123–65.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Global Equity Initiative and
Harvard University Press.
Guerrero, R., A. M. Amaris, and P. Yerramilli. 2013.
“Colombia Study.” Harvard University Global Health
Equity Initiative, updated from R. Guerrero, “Case 2:
Colombia,” in R. Atun and F. M. Knaul, 2012, and
“Innovative Financing: Local and Global Opportunities,”
in Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited
by F. M. Knaul, J. R. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadalia,
257–88. Cambridge, MA: Harvard Global Equity
Initiative and Harvard University Press. http://hgei
.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic910623.files /DCP3%20
Input%20-Colombia.pdf.
Gwatkin, D. R., and A. Ergo. 2011. “Universal Health Coverage:
Friend or Foe of Equity?” The Lancet 377: 2160–61.
Haseltine, W. A. 2013. Affordable Excellence: The Singapore
Healthcare Story. Washington, DC: Brookings Institution
Press.
Hewitt, M., S. Greenfield, and E. Stovall, eds. 2005. From
Cancer Patient to Cancer Survivor: Lost in Transition.
Washington, DC: Institute of Medicine and National
Research Council of the National Academics, The National
Academies Press.
Jamison, D. T., L. H. Summers, G. Alleyne, K. J. Arrow,
S. Berkley, and others. 2013. “Global Health 2035: A World
Converging within a Generation.” The Lancet 382 (9908):
1898–55.
Knaul, F. M., G. Alleyne, P. Piot, R. Atun, J. Gralow, and
others. 2012. “Health System Strengthening and Cancer:
A Diagonal Response to the Challenge of Chronicity.” In
Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited by
F. M. Knaul, J. R. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadalia, 95–122.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Global Equity Initiative and
Harvard University Press.
Knaul, F. M., H. Arreola-Ornelas, O. Méndez, M. Alsan,
J. Seinfeld, and others. 2014. “The Global Economic
Burden of Cancer.” In World Cancer Report 2014, edited
by B. W. Stewart and C. P. Wild, chapter 6.7. Lyon,
France: IARC. http://www.iarc.fr/en/publications/books
/wcr/index.php.

Financing Cancer Care in Low-Resource Settings

293

Knaul, F. M., H. Arreola-Ornelas, O. Mendez-Carniado,
C. Bryson-Cahn, J. Barofsky, and others. 2006. “Evidence
Is Good for Your Health System: Policy Reform to Remedy
Catastrophic and Impoverishing Health Spending in
Mexico.” The Lancet 368 (9549): 1828–41.
Knaul, F. M., S. Chertorivski Woldenberg, and H. ArreolaOrnelas. 2012. “Case 4: Mexico.” In Closing the Cancer
Divide: An Equity Imperative, edited by F. M. Knaul,
J. R. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadalia, 269–70. Cambridge,
MA: Harvard Global Equity Initiative and Harvard
University Press.
Knaul, F. M., E. González-Pier, O. Gómez-Dantés, D. GarciaJunco, H. H. Arreola-Ornelas, and others. 2012. “The
Quest for Universal Health Coverage: Achieving Social
Protection for All in Mexico.” The Lancet 380 (9849):
1259–79.
Knaul, F. M., J. R. Gralow, R. Atun, and A. Bhadalia, eds.
2012. Closing the Cancer Divide: An Equity Imperative.
Cambridge, MA: Harvard Global Equity Initiative and
Harvard University Press.
Leetongin, G. 2011. “Results Based Financing: Screening for
Cervical Cancer in Thailand.” World Bank Presentation.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org/INTHSD/Resources
/topics/415176-1217510876610/5259033-1333544225723
/Day5_3_Grits_Thailand_NHSO_EN.pdf.
Mahal, A., A. Karan, and M. Engelgau. 2010. “The Economic
Implications of Non-Communicable Disease for India.”
Health, Nutrition and Population Discussion Paper,
World Bank, Washington, DC. http://siteresources.worldbank
.org/HEALTHNUTRITIONANDPOPULATION/Resources
/281627-1095698140167/Economic Implications ofNCD
forIndia.pdf.
Mahal, A., A. Karan, V. Fan, and M. Engelgau. 2013. “The
Economic Burden of Cancers on Indian Households.” PLOS
One 8 (8): e71853. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0071853.
Nikolic I., A. Stanciole, and M. Zaydman. 2011. “Chronic
Emergency: Why NCDs Matter.” Health, Nutrition and
Population Discussion Paper, World Bank, Washington,
DC.
http://siteresources.worldbank.org /HEALTH
NUTRITION ANDPOPULATION/Resources/281627
- 1 0 9 5 6 9 8 1 4 0 1 6 7 / C h r o n i c E m e r g e n c y Why N C D s
Matter.pdf.
Park, S. M., Y. H. Yun, and S. Kwon. 2005. “Feasible Economic
Strategies to Improve Screening Compliance for Colorectal
Cancer in Korea.” World Journal of Gastroenterology 11 (11):
1587–93.
Rathe, M., F. M. Knaul, and P. Yerramilli. 2013. “Dominican
Republic Case Study.” Harvard Global Equity Initiative,
updated from M. Rathe, “Case 3: The Dominican Republic,”

294

Cancer

in R. Atun and R. M. Knaul, 2012. http://hgei.harvard
.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic910623.files/DCP3%20Input%
20-Dominican%20Republic.pdf.
Seinfeld, J., and M. Pleic. 2013. “Peru Case Study.” Harvard
Global Equity Initiative, updated from J. Seinfeld, “Case
4: Peru,” in R. Atun and F. M. Knaul, 2012. http://hgei
.harvard.edu /fs/docs/icb.topic910623.files/DCP3%20
Input%20-Peru.pdf.
Srithamrongswat, S., W. Aekplakorn, P. Jongudomsuk,
J. Thammatach-aree, W. Patcharanarumol, and others. 2010.
“Funding Health Promotion and Prevention: The Thai
Experience.” Background Paper 45 for the World Health
Report 2010, World Health Organization. http://www.who
.int/healthsystems/topics/financing/healthreport/Thailand
No45FINAL.pdf.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2010. World Health Report
2010: Health Systems Financing: The Path to Universal
Coverage. WHO, Geneva. http://www.who.int/whr/2010
/whr10_en.pdf?ua=1
———. 2011a. “World Health Statistics, 2011.” WHO, Geneva.
http://www.who.int/whosis/whostat/EN_WHS2011_Full
.pdf.
———. 2011b. “Country Cooperation Strategy: Thailand.”
http://www.who.int/countryfocus/cooperation_strategy
/listofccs/en/index.html.
———. 2012. “What Is Universal Health Coverage? Online
Q&A.” http://www.who.int/features/qa/universal_health
_coverage/en/index.html.
———. 2013. World Health Report 2013: Research for Universal
Health Coverage. Geneva: WHO.
World Bank. 2013. World Development Indicators 2013.
Washington, DC: World Bank. http://data.worldbank
.org/indicator/NY.GNP.PCAP.CD/countries/SG --XR?
page=1&display=default.
Yerramilli, P. 2013.“The Financing of Cancer Care and Control in
Andhra Pradesh,India.”MSc thesis,London School of Tropical
Medicine and Hygiene and London School of Economics.
Yerramilli, P., and J. Ataguba. 2013. “Ghana Case Study.”
Harvard Global Equity Initiative. http://hgei.harvard.edu
/fs/docs/icb.topic910623.files/DCP3%20Input%20-Ghana
.pdf.
Yerramilli, P., and R. Firestone. 2013. “Thailand Case Study.”
Harvard Global Equity Initiative. http://hgei.harvard.edu
/fs/docs/icb.topic910623.files/DCP3%20Input%20-%
20Thailandt.pdf.
Yerramilli, P., and X. X. Jiang. 2013. “China Case Study.”
Harvard University Global Equity Initiative. http://
hgei.harvard.edu/fs/docs/icb.topic910623.files/DCP3%
20Input%20-%20China.pdf.

Chapter

18

An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of
Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to Prevent
Cervical Cancer in China
Carol Levin, Monisha Sharma, Zachary Olson, Stéphane Verguet,
Ju-Fang Shi, Shao-Ming Wang, You-Lin Qiao, Dean T. Jamison,
and Jane J. Kim

INTRODUCTION
Disproportionate Burden of Disease
Cervical cancer is one of the 10 most common diseases
affecting women in China. Although the average national
estimates of the cervical cancer burden in China are
low, the burden may be underestimated because the
prevalence of the human papillomavirus (HPV) is
high. Cervical cancer mortality is heterogeneous across
geographic settings (Li, Kang, and Qiao 2011); it is highest among poor women living in Gansu, Shanxi, and
Shaanxi, the least developed provinces in central and
western China.
The low national cervical cancer estimates may be
the result of the lack of a nationwide cancer registry.
Most registries are located in urban areas, where the
socioeconomic status of women is higher and the cancer disease burden is likely to be lower than in rural
areas (Shi and others 2011). The HPV prevalence has
been found to be similar in rural and urban regions,
but cervical cancer mortality is significantly higher
among women in rural areas. This disproportionate
disease burden is likely attributable to the unequal
availability and utilization of health services, such as
screening and treatment.

Inadequate Screening Services
Screening in China is opportunistic in the absence of a
national cervical cancer screening program. From 2009
to 2011, the national government initiated a program
to provide free cervical cancer screening for 10 million
rural women between ages 35 and 59 years; the program
covered only 7 percent of women because of the shortages of gynecologists and cytologists and an overburdened health care system (Colombara and Wang 2013;
Qiao 2010; The Lancet 2009). China has an estimated
500 million women in rural areas; scaling up preventive
services constitutes a significant public health challenge
(Li, Kang, and Qiao 2011), and national cervical cancer
screening coverage remains low (Gakidou, Nordhagen,
and Obermeier 2008; WHO 2012). Additional reasons for low screening coverage include weak health
system infrastructure to support screening, diagnosis,
and treatment; limited access to health services; and
limited knowledge of cervical cancer among women in
less developed regions (Jia and others 2013; Qiao and
others 2008).
China’s health care system has been evolving
to respond to the pervasive inequity in access to
health services. In 2009, China began to introduce

Corresponding author: Carol Levin, PhD, University of Washington, clevin@uw.edu.

295

universal health coverage (Yip and others 2012), reaching relatively high coverage in urban and rural areas
with two government-sponsored schemes. Despite the
high coverage, the benefits are minimal and reimbursement is limited to inpatient expenses. It is unclear how
recent health insurance schemes and opportunistic
screening programs have affected women’s cervical
cancer treatment rates, health outcomes, and costs.
Recent studies that focused on prevention indicate that
existing cancer prevention services do not reach women
in poorer rural and urban areas (Jia and others 2013;
Li, Kang, and Qiao 2011; Shi, Canfell, and others 2012).
This trend is likely to continue until insurance schemes
cover outpatient services, including treatment of precancer and early-stage cancer.
Although widespread screening with cytology has
dramatically reduced the cervical cancer burden in
high-income countries, low-resource settings have been
unable to achieve similar cancer reductions. Newer
screening technologies are cheaper and easier to implement and scale up than cytology and can reduce the
cervical cancer burden among Chinese women, protecting them from the future costs and consequences
of the disease. For example, a study of cervical cancer
screening that evaluated strategies using cervical cytology and HPV DNA testing found that screening women
three times in their lives (between the ages of 25 and 45
years) reduced the risk of cancer by 50 percent at a cost
of US$150 per life-year saved (LYS). The most efficient
strategy used a two-visit rapid HPV DNA test, with
screening and diagnostic assessment at a county hospital
and treatment provided during the second visit (Levin
and others 2010; Li and others 2013; Shi, Canfell, and
others 2012; Wang and others 2013; Zhang, Pan, and
others 2013; Zhao and others 2013).
HPV Vaccination
In addition to screening, HPV vaccination presents a
promising primary prevention strategy against cervical
cancer. Several studies have concluded that screening
women and vaccinating preadolescent girls against HPV
are cost-effective interventions in reducing the burden
of cervical cancer in China (Canfell and others 2011;
Goldie and others 2008; Levin and others 2010; Shi and
others 2011). Canfell and others (2011) showed that
vaccination strategies were cost effective up to US$55
per vaccinated girl, with incremental cost-effectiveness
ratios (ICERs) of US$2,746 per LYS when vaccination
was combined with screening once in a lifetime; the
ICER was up to US$5,963 per LYS when combined with
five screenings in a lifetime. Goldie and others (2008)
found an ICER of US$1,360 per LYS when total vaccine

296

Cancer

costs were US$25 per vaccinated girl. Chapter 4 in this
volume (Denny and others 2015) provides a fuller
description of the cost-effectiveness of cervical cancer
prevention in China and other settings.
Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Recent attention to attaining the goal of universal health
coverage provides a strong rationale for exploring
mechanisms to expand access to the prevention and
treatment of cervical cancer in China, without increasing the financial burden of the women seeking care and
paying for services (WHO 2013b). We conducted an
extended cost-effectiveness analysis (ECEA) to evaluate
public financing of HPV vaccination to prevent cervical cancer. Importantly, the ECEA approach adds new
dimensions to conventional cost-effectiveness analysis
through a more explicit treatment of equity and impact
on financial risk protection—prevention of medical
impoverishment (Verguet and others 2015; Verguet,
Laxminarayan, and Jamison 2015; Verguet and others
2013). Specifically, ECEA can evaluate publicly financed
programs by measuring program impact along four
main dimensions:
• Health benefits
• Household private expenditures averted (household
cost savings)
• Financial risk protection provided to households
• Distributional consequences across the wealth strata
of country populations.
As a result, ECEA enables the quantitative inclusion
of information on equity and on how much financial
risk protection is bought per dollar expenditure on
health policy, in addition to how much health is bought
(Verguet, Laxminarayan, and Jamison 2015; Verguet and
others 2013).
As a consequence, the distribution of health and
financial benefits resulting from health interventions—
and, by extension, from the policy instruments that
finance them—can be examined to answer the question
of whether the interventions are pro-poor. In practice,
the ECEA approach can also be used to examine the
financial effects of interventions and policies on individuals or families by income group and in aggregate.
Health policies and interventions typically involve costs
to the public sector and to households. Even if a specific intervention is provided at no cost, users often
incur time costs if they are required to travel or wait at
health facilities to receive information, treatment, or test
results; the value placed on these costs differs according
to income level.

Publicly financed health interventions can help users
to avoid future costs. For example, HPV vaccination and
cancer screening programs reduce the risk of cervical
cancer, which might otherwise lead to medical impoverishment, devastating health consequences (for example,
the death of a mother increases the mortality risk for
children), or both (for example, the death of the primary
household income earner could impoverish the family).
The objective of this analysis is to evaluate the consequences of public finance of HPV vaccination in China,
using the ECEA methodology. Public finance increases
the uptake of the HPV vaccine, which can improve
health, reduce household medical expenditures related
to cervical cancer treatment, and prevent subsequent
impoverishment. Finally, public finance can have differential impacts among populations of different income
levels. We estimate the level and distribution across
income groups of the cervical cancer deaths averted,
the households’ expenditures related to cervical cancer
treatment averted and the costs needed to sustain the
HPV program, and the financial risk protection that the
program provides, using a combination of indicators.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Model
We synthesized the available epidemiological, clinical,
and economic data from China, using a previously
described individual-based Monte Carlo simulation
model of cervical cancer (Goldhaber-Fiebert and others
2007; Goldie and others 2007; Kim and others 2007). The
model consists of health states representing important
clinical stages of disease, including HPV infection, grade
of precancerous lesions, and stage of invasive cancer.
We evaluated vaccination and screening as a combined
strategy in a single cohort, such that preadolescent girls
who are vaccinated will also eventually receive screening.
Cervical cancer can be detected through symptoms
or screening, and women with cancer survive according to stage-specific survival rates for local, regional,
and metastatic disease. This model does not consider
screening strategies alone for the current cohort of older
women. Individual girls enter the model at age nine
years, before sexual debut and free of HPV infection, and
they transition between health states throughout their
lifetimes. Each month, women face a risk of acquiring
HPV infection; once infected, they can clear their infection or develop low- or high-grade lesions, categorized
as cervical intraepithelial neoplasia, grade 1 (CIN 1) or
grade 2,3 (CIN 2,3). Low-grade lesions can regress; CIN
2,3 can progress to invasive cancer. These transitions are
determined by age, HPV type, and type-specific natural

immunity after clearance of HPV infections. The natural
history and model transitions have been well described
elsewhere (Kim and Goldie 2008; Kim, Ortendahl, and
Goldie 2009). For a more extensive discussion of the
natural history of cervical cancer, see chapter 4 in this
volume (Denny and others 2015).
All women are subject to mortality from the competing causes listed in the World Health Organization
(WHO) life table estimates for China (WHO 2011).
Our approach was to calibrate the model for the cervical
cancer burden of the country as a whole and also for the
HPV 16/18 type distribution in cervical cancer, which
has been found in previous meta-analyses to be stable
for 16/18 at 70 percent, regardless of country. De Sanjose
and others (2010) found that more than 30 types of HPV
are sexually transmitted and may lead to cervical cancer,
most notably HPV 16 and 18, which together contribute
to approximately 70 percent of cervical cancers worldwide. Accordingly, HPV is categorized as follows:
• High-risk type 16 (HR-16)
• High-risk type 18 (HR-18)
• Other high-risk types (HR-other), including 31, 33,
35, 39, 45, 51, 52, 56, 58, 59, 66, 68, 73, and 82
• Low-risk (LR) types, including 6, 11, 26, 32, 34, 40,
42, 44, 53, 54, 55, 57, 61, 62, 64, 67, 69, 70, 71, 72, 81,
83, and 84.
We initially established model parameters using the
best available information on the natural history of HPV
infection and cervical carcinogenesis. The model was
adapted to the context in China using likelihood-based
methods to fit the parameters to epidemiological data
(figure 18A.1 in online annex 18A). Age-specific cervical
cancer estimates were obtained from the GLOBOCAN
(2008); data on HPV 16 and 18–type distribution in
CIN 2,3 and cervical cancer were from a meta-analysis
of primary data from Asia (Bao and others 2008)
(figure 18A.2 in online annex 18A). The baseline natural
history parameters were allowed to vary over plausible ranges. We identified sets of parameter values that
achieved close fit to the empirical data and conducted
the analysis using the parameter set with the maximum
likelihood. Additional details of the model structure,
calibration process, and calibration results are available
online in annex 18A.
Strategies, Data, and Assumptions
To model the impact of cervical cancer prevention on
distributional benefits and financial risk protection, we
simulated screening with cytology and visual inspection
with acetic acid (VIA) at five-year intervals, beginning at

An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to Prevent Cervical Cancer in China

297

age 35 years, for a cohort of one million women in each
of the income quintiles. We assumed that the screening
frequency progressively increases with income; women
in the lowest two quintiles would be screened once in a
lifetime, those in the next two income quintiles would
be screened three times in a lifetime, and those in the
highest quintile would be screened five times in a lifetime. Consistent with assumptions made in previous
analyses (Goldie and others 2001; Goldie and others
2005), cytology was assumed to occur in three visits: the
initial screening (visit 1); colposcopy and possible biopsy
for screen-positive women (visit 2); and treatment of
precancerous lesions or invasive cancer (visit 3), including loop electrosurgical excision procedure (LEEP),
cold knife conization, simple hysterectomy, or simple
radiotherapy, depending on lesion size or cancer stage.
The VIA screening incorporated same-day screening and
treatment for all women with positive screening results
as described in the Comprehensive Cervical Cancer
Control guidelines (WHO 2006).
Vaccination was assumed to occur before age 12
(prior to sexual debut), with full adherence to the three
doses, affording complete and lifelong protection against
HPV 16 and 18. HPV vaccine coverage was assumed at
70 percent, based on current immunization rates of over
95 percent for childhood vaccines and recent evidence
on the feasibility of reaching preadolescent girls with
HPV vaccination using facility, school-based, and outreach strategies (La Montagne and others 2011; WHO
2013a). We used screening coverage estimates by quintile from the WHO Study of Global AGEing and Adult
Health (WHO 2012). In the absence of patient health
utilization data for screen-positive women, we assumed
that loss to follow-up from screening to subsequent
visits for diagnosis and treatment was inversely related
to income, with loss to follow-up rates ranging from 62
to 5 percent from lowest to highest quintile, respectively.
Recognizing that service utilization and loss to follow-up
will be influenced by heterogeneity in health system,
spatial, and socioeconomic factors across China’s provinces, we conducted a sensitivity analysis on screening
coverage rates and the loss to follow-up assumptions by
quintile. Table 18.1 summarizes the point estimates for
the model input parameters.
Using output data from the simulation model, we
estimated the level and distribution of deaths averted by
income quintile, comparing vaccination plus screening
against screening at current coverage rates. We also estimated the reduction in cervical cancer, incremental costs
to the government equal to HPV vaccination costs minus
cervical cancer treatment costs averted, and patient cost
savings, as well as the incremental government health
care costs per death averted. Financial risk protection

298

Cancer

Table 18.1 Summary of Parameters Used for Modeling
the Impact and Costs of a Publicly Financed HPV
Vaccination Policy in China
Parameter

Estimate
a

b

Screening with cytology: frequency and coverage (%)
Quintile I: Once per lifetime

21

Quintile II: Once per lifetime

34

Quintile III: Three times per lifetime

43

Quintile IV: Three times per lifetime

47

Quintile V: Five times per lifetime

51

c

Loss to follow-up (%)
Quintile I

62

Quintile II

40

Quintile III

22

Quintile IV

13

Quintile V

5
c

Vaccine characteristics

Vaccination coverage (%)

70

HPV vaccine price per dose (US$)

13

Incremental vaccine program delivery cost per fully
immunized girl (US$)

5

Vaccine cost per fully immunized girl, including
wastage and handling (US$)

46

Income and wagesd
Average GDP per capita (US$)

3,749

Average GDP per capitae (US$)
Quintile I

783

Quintile II

1,633

Quintile III

2,567

Quintile IV

3,888

Quintile V

7,896

Mean wage ratef (US$)
Quintile I

3

Quintile II

6

Quintile III

10

Quintile IV

15

Quintile V

30

Note: Income quintiles are from lowest (I) to highest (V). Monetary values are in 2009
U.S. dollars. GDP = gross domestic product; HPV = human papillomavirus.
a. Frequency of screening was estimated at one time and five times per lifetime for all
income quintiles in the sensitivity analysis.
b. Estimates from Gakidou, Nordhagen, and Obermeyer (2008) and WHO (2012).
c. Estimates are assumed values.
d. Estimates from WHO Global Health Observatory.
e. Estimates from WHO (2012) and WHO Global Health Observatory.
f. Estimates from WHO Global Health Observatory and Shi, Chen, and others (2012).

was estimated using a combination of indicators, including the number of women who would avoid cervical
cancer treatment expenses and the average out-of-pocket
expenses averted as a share of average per capita income,
measured by gross domestic product (GDP). We present
all results by income quintile.
Cost Data Sources
To estimate direct medical and nonmedical costs
associated with screening, diagnosis, and treatment, we
used published cost data from two studies conducted
in China (Levin and others 2010; Shi, Chen, and others 2012), where all costs were expressed in 2009 U.S.
dollars. Since these studies provided cost estimates by
type of facility in urban and rural settings, we assumed
an average health-seeking behavior by income quintile and geographic setting, where in the lowest three
income quintiles rural and urban women were screened
at the levels of township (primary health center) and
county hospital, respectively, and all women in these
lower quintiles received diagnosis and treatment at the
county hospital. We assumed that in the highest two
income quintiles, rural and urban women were screened
and treated at prefecture or provincial level hospitals,
respectively.
We then applied a weighted average unit cost for
screening, diagnosis, and cancer treatment, based on
urban and rural population proportions by income
quintile. To estimate the consequences for household
and government costs, we assumed that 35 percent of
cancer screening and treatment costs are still privately
financed in China (WHO Global Health Observatory),
reflecting that many services, including outpatient services, are not covered, despite mandatory health insurance schemes. Direct nonmedical patient time costs for
transportation and waiting were based on time estimates
from Shi, Chen, and others (2012), using an updated
national average wage rate in China ranging from US$3
to US$30 per day for the lowest to highest quintile,
respectively. The average wage rate is equal to average per
capita income divided by 255 workdays per year at eight
hours per day (Shi, Chen, and others 2012). We obtained
GDP data from the World Bank and used the consumer
price index to deflate all costs to 2009 U.S. dollars. Per
capita income for each quintile is the proportion of
GDP accrued to each income quintile using estimates
from the World Bank and PovCalNet, an online poverty
analysis tool, divided by the total population per quintile
(World Bank 2013a, 2013b).
Although Merck and GlaxoSmithKline’s commercially available HPV vaccines are not yet approved in
China, both are offered at low prices for public sector

programs that range from less than US$5 for countries
eligible for Gavi, the Vaccine Alliance, to US$13 for Pan
American Health Organization (PAHO) countries (Gavi
2013). Given the likelihood that China could negotiate
lower public sector prices (Colombara and Wang 2013),
we assumed a public sector cost of US$46 per fully
immunized girl, which includes the vaccine price (three
doses at US$13 per dose), vaccine wastage (2 percent),
freight (6 percent), and program administration cost
(US$5). The program administration cost captures the
average cost of new delivery strategies to reach preadolescent girls who fall outside existing routine immunization programs. The program administration costs are
lower than the average incremental costs in recent studies in Latin America and the Caribbean and Sub-Saharan
Africa, but they are likely to reflect economies of scale
that are found in more densely populated Asian countries (Levin and others 2013). Tables 18A.2 and 18A.3, in
online annex 18A, summarize the cost data by quintile.

Sensitivity Analysis
We performed a sensitivity analysis of the findings and
evaluated the robustness of the results to changes in
screening frequency per lifetime, screening coverage,
loss to follow-up rates, and the cost per fully vaccinated
girl. To accommodate the uncertainty around the uptake
of the vaccine and vaccine delivery costs in the case of
China, we conducted a sensitivity analysis and varied the
cost between US$10 and US$100 per fully immunized
girl to allow for either higher vaccine prices or higher
service delivery costs. Table 18.2 provides the estimates
or ranges used in the sensitivity analysis for these
parameters and the way they varied by income quintile.
Not shown are the estimates for cancer treatment costs,
which were uniformly increased by 50 and 100 percent
for all income quintiles.

RESULTS
We estimate that adding preadolescent HPV vaccination at 70 percent coverage to current screening will
yield a 44 percent cancer reduction across all income
quintiles, as shown in table 18.3. Although the relative
cancer reduction is constant across income groups, the
absolute numbers of cervical cancer deaths averted and
the financial risk protection from HPV vaccination are
highest among women in the lowest quintile; women in
the bottom income quintiles received relatively higher
benefits compared with those in the upper income
quintiles. HPV vaccination averts 15 percent more
detected cancer cases and 18 percent more deaths in the

An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to Prevent Cervical Cancer in China

299

Table 18.2 Sensitivity Analysis Parameter Estimates
and Ranges for HPV Vaccine and Service Delivery
Costs
(US$)
Parameter

Point
estimate

Estimate
or range

Screening with cytology: frequencya,b and coverage (%)
Quintile I: Once per lifetime

21

21–70

Quintile II: Once per lifetime

34

34–70

Quintile III: Three times per lifetime

43

43–70

Quintile IV: Three times per lifetime

47

47–70

Quintile V: Five times per lifetime

51

51–70

Quintile I

62

15, 39

Quintile II

40

15, 24

Quintile III

22

15, 22

Quintile IV

13

15, 17

Quintile V

5

11, 15

46

10–100

Loss to follow-upc (%)

Vaccine cost per fully immunized girl,
including wastage and handling (US$)

Note: Income quintiles are from lowest (I) to highest (V). Monetary values are in 2009
U.S. dollars. HPV = human papillomavirus.
a. The frequency of screening is estimated at one time and five times per lifetime for all
income quintiles in the sensitivity analysis.
b. Estimates from Gakidou, Nordhagen, and Obermeyer (2008) and WHO (2012).
c. Estimates are assumed.

lowest compared with the highest quintile. Although
in absolute dollars patient savings were higher in the
top income quintile compared with the lowest quintile
(US$7,041,335 and US$1,633,160, respectively), the cost
savings from HPV vaccination constituted a larger share
of per capita income among women in the bottom

income quintiles, ranging from 60 percent among the
lowest income quintile to 30 percent among the highest
quintile.
At a vaccine cost of US$46 per fully immunized girl
and 70 percent coverage, the incremental cost is approximately US$160 million for a single cohort of five million
girls. At the relatively low levels of cancer screening and
treatment in China, government intervention costs do
not vary by wealth strata, since these medical savings are
offset by the publically financed HPV vaccination costs.
Given China’s low reported rates of cervical cancer
screening, the model results and relative relationships
across income quintiles are robust to changes in assumptions about screening frequency, screening coverage,
and loss to follow-up (table 18.4). As expected, changes
in the cost per fully immunized girl do not have an
impact on deaths averted, cancer reduction, or financial
risk protection, assuming that 70 percent coverage is
maintained. At US$10 per fully vaccinated girl, the cost
per death averted ranges from US$2,161 for the lowest
income quintile to US$2,608 for the highest income
quintile. At US$100 per vaccinated girl, the cost per
death averted increases to US$24,000 for the lowest
income quintile to more than US$29,000 for the highest income quintile (table 18.4). Universal coverage of
the HPV vaccination becomes even more favorable for
individuals in the lower income quintiles and provides
greater relative financial risk protection when treatment
costs are increased by an additional 50 or 100 percent
(table 18.5).

DISCUSSION
Despite worldwide progress in reducing the burden of
cervical cancer, more than 270,000 women still die from
the disease each year; the majority of these deaths occur

Table 18.3 Benefits and Costs of a Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination Policy in China
Quintile
Benefit or cost
Deaths averted per million women
Government cost per million women (incremental) (US$)

I

II

III

IV

V

2,877

2,854

2,667

2,604

2,362

31,417,285

31,420,191

31,440,420

31,446,679

31,359,970

Government cost per death averted (US$)

3,540

3,511

3,312

3,256

2,999

Treatment-seeking cases of cancer averted per million women

3,540

3,511

3,312

3,256

2,999

Patient cost savings per million women (US$)

1,633,160

2,240,688

2,785,626

4,417,303

7,041,335

Savings as percentage of total income

59

39

33

35

30

Cancer reduction (%)

44

44

43

43

44

Note: Income quintiles are from lowest (I) to highest (V). Monetary values are in 2009 U.S. dollars. HPV = human papillomavirus.

300

Cancer

Table 18.4 Results of Sensitivity Analysis for HPV Vaccination Costs at US$10, US$46, and US$100 per Fully
Vaccinated Girl
Quintile
Result

I

II

III

IV

V

2,877

2,854

2,667

2,604

2,362

HPV vaccination at US$10 per fully vaccinated girl
Deaths averted
Government cost (incremental) (US$)

6,217,285

6,220,191

6,240,420

6,246,679

6,159,970

Government cost per death averted (US$)

2,161

2,179

2,340

2,399

2,608

Treatment-seeking cases of cancer averted

3,540

3,511

3,312

3,256

2,999

Patient cost savings (US$)

1,633,160

2,240,688

2,785,626

4,417,303

7,041,335

Savings as percentage of income

59

39

33

35

30

Cancer reduction (%)

44

44

43

43

44

2,877

2,854

2,667

2,604

2,362

HPV vaccination at US$46 per fully vaccinated girl
Deaths averted
Government cost (incremental) (US$)

31,417,285

31,420,191

31,440,420

31,446,679

31,359,970

Government cost per death averted (US$)

10,920

11,009

11,789

12,076

13,277

Treatment-seeking cases of cancer averted

3,540

3,511

3,312

3,256

2,999

Patient cost savings (US$)

1,633,160

2,240,688

2,785,626

4,417,303

7,041,335

Savings as percentage of income

59

39

33

35

30

Cancer reduction (%)

44

44

43

43

44

2,877

2,854

2,667

2,604

2,362

HPV vaccination at US$100 per fully vaccinated girl
Deaths averted
Government cost (incremental) (US$)

69,217,285

69,220,191

69,240,420

69,246,679

69,159,970

Government cost per death averted (US$)

24,059

24,254

25,962

26,592

29,280

Treatment-seeking cases of cancer averted

3,540

3,511

3,312

3,256

2,999

Patient cost savings (US$)

1,633,160

2,240,688

2,785,626

4,417,303

7,041,335

Savings as percentage of income

59

39

33

35

30

Cancer reduction (%)

44

44

43

43

44

Note: Income quintiles are from lowest (I) to highest (V). Monetary values are in 2009 U.S. dollars. HPV = human papillomavirus.

in Asia, Latin America and the Caribbean, and SubSaharan Africa. China accounts for 12 percent of new
cervical cancer cases each year (Ferlay and others 2013),
with higher incidence and death rates in the country’s
poorest provinces. The factors contributing to the disproportionate distribution of cervical cancer disease
include low coverage and poor quality of screening programs, differential access to services for screening and
treatment, poverty, and lack of awareness. The availability of HPV vaccines can complement existing cervical
cancer prevention efforts, accelerating the equity and
health impacts by overcoming many of these barriers
(Tsu and Levin 2008).
The HPV vaccine holds great promise for reducing
the burden of cervical cancer, but the vaccine is not

yet available in China. Delaying the introduction of
the HPV vaccine will result in a lost opportunity to
prevent cervical cancer cases and deaths. A national
vaccination program from 2006 to 2012 of all girls ages
9–15 years could have prevented 381,000 cervical cancer
cases and 212,000 related deaths in the coming decades
(Colombara and Wang 2013). It is expected that China
could negotiate HPV vaccine prices to cost-effective levels of approximately US$9 to US$13 per dose, but many
Chinese women—at least 33 percent—are not willing to
pay more than US$3 (Li and others 2009). A successful
program is likely to depend on government financing.
We applied an ECEA approach to evaluate the impact
of a publically financed policy for HPV vaccination in
China on the distribution of health consequences and

An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to Prevent Cervical Cancer in China

301

Table 18.5 Results of Sensitivity Analysis Assuming Treatment Costs Increase by 50 Percent and 100 Percent
Compared with Baseline
Quintile
Result

I

II

III

IV

V

2,877

2,854

2,667

2,604

2,362

31,417,285

31,420,191

31,440,420

31,446,679

31,359,970

Government cost per death averted (US$)

10,920

11,009

11,789

12,076

13,277

Treatment-seeking cases of cancer averted

3,540

3,511

3,312

3,256

2,999

1,633,160

2,240,688

2,785,626

4,417,303

7,041,335

Baseline strategy
Deaths averted
Government cost (incremental) (US$)

Patient cost savings (US$)
Savings as percentage of income

59

39

33

35

30

Cancer reduction (%)

44

44

43

43

44

2,877

2,854

2,667

2,604

2,362

31,035,156

31,057,311

31,085,113

31,103,101

30,939,508

Government cost per death averted (US$)

10,787

10,882

11,655

11,944

13,099

Treatment-seeking cases of cancer averted

3,540

3,511

3,312

3,256

2,999

1,899,093

2,506,089

3,040,532

4,714,290

7,310,555

Treatment costs increased by 50%
Deaths averted
Government cost (incremental) (US$)

Patient cost savings (US$)
Savings as percentage of income

69

44

36

37

31

Cancer reduction (%)

44

44

43

43

44

2,877

2,854

2,667

2,604

2,362

30,647,484

30,682,085

30,728,534

30,760,469

30,550,290

Government cost per death averted (US$)

10,653

10,751

11,522

11,813

12,934

Treatment-seeking cases of cancer averted

3540

3511

3312

3256

2999

2,165,026

2,771,490

3,295,438

5,011,276

7,579,775

Treatment costs increased by 100%
Deaths averted
Government cost (incremental) (US$)

Patient cost savings (US$)
Savings as percentage of income

78

48

39

40

32

Cancer reduction (%)

44

44

43

43

44

Note: Income quintiles are from lowest (I) to highest (V). Monetary values are in 2009 U.S. dollars.

financial risk protection benefits across income levels.
Our analysis showed that preadolescent HPV vaccination, added to current cervical cancer screening, could
reduce cancer by over 40 percent across all income
groups, while providing relatively higher financial protection to households in the bottom income quintiles.
The low screening coverage rates reported for China
affect the government and patient screening and treatment costs, but with differential results.
• From the governmental perspective, a publically
financed HPV vaccination program would increase
net costs, with little offset from averted cervical-related
treatment costs, because of the low levels of screening.

302

Cancer

• Although HPV vaccination led to patient cost savings
that were small relative to the increase in government
costs, all income groups experienced cost savings;
importantly, there was a powerful equity effect, with
higher financial risk protection in the poorest groups.
• Patient cost savings represent a large proportion of
poor women’s average per capita income, reaching
60 percent among women in the bottom income
quintile and declining to 30 percent among women
in the wealthiest quintile.
We also estimated standard cost-effectiveness ratios
(results available from the authors) and, similar to
previous studies conducted in China, found that HPV

vaccination is cost effective across all income groups
when the cost is less than US$50 per vaccinated girl.
Since the vaccine is not yet available in China, we
assumed a cost of US$46 per vaccinated girl, using
US$13 per dose, based on the manufacturers’ offer
price to PAHO for public vaccination programs in
Latin America and the Caribbean. The financial cost
of vaccinating 70 percent of China’s current cohort
of 6.6 million 10-year-old girls is US$213 million.
This estimate, which accounts for less than 0.5 percent of projected health care spending of US$357
billion in 2011, would have a large financial impact on
China’s current Expanded Program for Immunization
(EPI). The introduction of the HPV vaccine would
require a change in policy to finance the vaccine publicly, through current health insurance schemes or
inclusion in EPI, which provides free childhood vaccines for measles, diphtheria/tetanus/pertussis, Bacille
Calmette–Guérin, polio, and hepatitis B. EPI manages
non-EPI vaccines, such as those for Japanese encephalitis, mumps, and rubella, but patients pay for these vaccines via user fees. A third type of “optional” vaccines,
such as hepatitis A, Haemophilus influenza type B, and
rotavirus, are procured and delivered outside EPI and
paid for by patients without government subsidies (Liu
and others 2006).
Limitations of the Analysis
This analysis has several limitations:
• First, the analysis is an illustrative application of the
ECEA method using the best available published data
from selected provinces, which do not fully capture
the heterogeneity in disease burden, health systems,
socioeconomic development, and GDP per capita
across China’s provinces. For example, we used data
from different regions in China to estimate the cervical cancer burden and costs for the whole country,
leading to results that may not hold for a country as
large as China. Accordingly, in this application, the
results should be considered suggestive, rather than
evidence based, but the estimates can be refined for
specific subregions as improved data become available.
• Second, the ECEA method simulates the costs and
impacts of HPV vaccination by income quintile; however, there are limited data on the variation of HPV
incidence, mortality rates, loss to follow-up rates for
screening, and out-of-pocket health expenses related
to cancer prevention or treatment by wealth or
income category.
• Third, there is limited information on health service
utilization; screening and treatment costs; and the

impact of mandatory health insurance by prefecture,
province, and other geographic settings or across
wealth strata. Our assumptions were based on aggregate national estimates of private expenses, which
may be out of date, given the recent rapid growth in
GDP per capita.
• Fourth, we estimated women’s time using a wage rate
derived from a national estimate of GDP per capita
income, which may overestimate income in the lowest quintile, where some rural communities are likely
to live on US$2 per day or less.
• Fifth, this analysis does not include women’s transport costs in seeking screening, treatment, or vaccination; these costs are expected to be small components
of patient costs based on previous analyses in China
(Canfell and others 2011; Levin and others 2010; Shi,
Chen, and others 2012).
• Sixth, we did not conduct an exhaustive evaluation
of scenarios, including increasing screening to higher
levels, since the objective of the analysis was to illustrate the potential of an HPV vaccination program
to address equity and financial risk protection and
not to identify optimal cervical cancer prevention
approaches.
An ECEA approach yields new and essential information on a policy’s ability to reduce inequity and
catastrophic expenses. The approach complements
information on value for money from traditional
cost-effectiveness analyses. Future applications of this
approach will benefit from improved information on
public and private health financing, as well as from
disaggregated data on disease burden and health service
utilization by key socioeconomic, demographic, and
geographic variables.

CONCLUSIONS
HPV vaccines have not yet been approved in China, and
concern is growing that the use of HPV vaccines in the
country is still a long way off (Lu 2013). A recent editorial
recognizing the burden of cervical cancer in China, as well
as its unequal impact among women in lower income
groups, proposes a semi-mandatory HPV vaccination
program in China targeted to low-income, high-risk
women living in regions with historically high prevalence
of cervical cancer (Zhang, Li, and others 2013). This
illustrative application of the ECEA approach to a publicly financed HPV vaccination policy provides decision
makers with the potential distributional consequences
and financial risk protection of including cervical cancer in future health care reform investments to provide

An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to Prevent Cervical Cancer in China

303

insight to policy debates in China. An ECEA can provide
policy makers with additional evidence beyond evidence
of effectiveness, costs, and cost-effectiveness for selective
resource allocation to the populations and provinces
most in need in the context of public financing and the
strengthening of Chinese health reform.
Previous research has demonstrated that HPV
vaccination in China can be cost-effective at a cost of
US$50 per vaccinated girl. A targeted program may
even be affordable, given China’s plans for dramatically increasing health care spending in the near future
(Le Deu and others 2012; Zhang, Li, and others 2013).
Ensuring high and uniform HPV vaccine uptake will
likely also contribute to more equitable gains with
respect to the reduction of morbidity and mortality
from cervical cancer and has the potential to protect
women in poor households against catastrophic cervical
cancer medical expenses.

NOTE
This chapter was previously published in a shorter form in
Vaccine; the original publication may be found at doi: 10.1016/j.
vaccine.2015.02.052. It is reprinted here under the Creative
Commons CC-BY 4.0 License (https://creativecommons
.org/licenses/by/4.0/). Reprinting in this volume does not
indicate Elsevier’s endorsement. doi:10.1016/j.vaccine.
2015.02.052
World Bank Income Classifications as of July 2014 are as
follows, based on estimates of gross national income (GNI)
per capita for 2013:
•
•

•

Low-income countries (LICs) = US$1,045 or less
Middle-income countries (MICs) are subdivided:
a) lower-middle-income = US$1,046 to US$4,125
b) upper-middle-income (UMICs) = US$4,126 to US$12,745
High-income countries (HICs) = US$12,746 or more.

REFERENCES
Bao, Y. P., N. Li, J. S. Smith, Y. L. Qiao, and Asian Cervical
Cancer Prevention Supervisory Board. 2008. “Human
Papillomavirus Type Distribution in Women from Asia:
A Meta-Analysis.” International Journal of Gynecological
Cancer 18 (1): 71–79.
Canfell, K., J. F. Shi, J. B. Lew, R. Walker, F. H. Zhao, and
others. 2011. “Prevention of Cervical Cancer in Rural
China: Evaluation of HPV Vaccination and Primary HPV
Screening Strategies.” Vaccine 29 (13): 2487–94.
Colombara, D. V., and S.-M. Wang. 2013. “The Impact of HPV
Vaccination Delays in China: Lessons from HBV Control
Programs.” Vaccine 31 (38): 4057–59.

304

Cancer

Denny, L., R. Herrero, C. Levin, and J. T. Kim. 2015. “Cervical
Cancer.” In Disease Control Priorities (third edition): Volume 3,
Cancer, edited by H. Gelband, P. Jha, R. Sankaranarayanan,
and S. Horton. Washington, DC: World Bank.
de Sanjose, S., W. G. V. Quint, L. Alemany, D. T. Geraets,
J. E. Klaustermeier, and others. 2010.“Human Papillomavirus
Genotype Attribution in Invasive Cervical Cancer: A
Retrospective Cross-Sectional Worldwide Study.” The
Lancet Oncology 11 (11): 1048–56.
Ferlay, J., H. R. Shin, F. Bray, D. Forman, C. Mathers, and others.
2010. “Estimates of Worldwide Burden of Cancer in 2008:
GLOBOCAN 2008.” International Journal of Cancer 127
(12): 2893–917. doi:10.1002/ijc.25516.
Ferlay, J., I. Soerjomataram, M. Ervik, R. Dikshit, S. Eser, and
others. 2013. GLOBOCAN 2012 v1.0, Cancer Incidence and
Mortality Worldwide: IARC CancerBase No. 11 [Internet].
Lyon: IARC. http://globocan.iarc.fr.
Gakidou, E., S. Nordhagen, and Z. Obermeyer. 2008.
“Coverage of Cervical Cancer Screening in 57 Countries:
Low Average Levels and Large Inequalities.” PLoS Medicine
5 (6): e132.
Gavi (Vaccine Alliance). 2013. “Human Papillomavirus
Vaccine Support.” http://www.gavialliance.org/support/nvs
/human-papillomavirus-vaccine-support.
Goldhaber-Fiebert, J. D., N. K. Stout, J. Ortendahl,
K. M. Kuntz, S. J. Goldie, and others. 2007. “Modeling
Human Papillomavirus and Cervical Cancer in the United
States for Analyses of Screening and Vaccination.” Population
Health Metrics 5: 11. doi:10.1186/1478-7954-5-11.
Goldie, S. J., M. Diaz, S. Y. Kim, C. E. Levin, H. Van Minh,
and others. 2008. “Mathematical Models of Cervical
Cancer Prevention in the Asia Pacific Region.” Vaccine
26 (Suppl. 12): M17–29.
Goldie, S. J., L. Gaffikin, J. D. Goldhaber-Fiebert, A. GordilloTobar, C. Levin, and others. 2005. “Cost-Effectiveness of
Cervical-Cancer Screening in Five Developing Countries.”
New England Journal of Medicine 353 (20): 2158–68.
Goldie, S. J., J. J. Kim, K. Kobus, J. D. Goldhaber-Fiebert,
J. Salomon, and others. 2007. “Cost-Effectiveness of HPV
16, 18 Vaccination in Brazil.” Vaccine 25 (33): 6257–70.
Goldie, S. J., L. Kuhn, L. Denny, A. Pollack, and T. C. Wright.
2001. “Policy Analysis of Cervical Cancer Screening
Strategies in Low-Resource Settings: Clinical Benefits
and Cost-Effectiveness.” Journal of the American Medical
Association 285 (24): 3107–15.
IARC (International Agency for Research on Cancer). 2012.
http://www.iarc.fr/.
Jia, Y., S. Li, R. Yang, H. Zhou, Q. Xiang, and others. 2013.
“Knowledge about Cervical Cancer and Barriers of
Screening Program among Women in Wufeng County, a
High-Incidence Region of Cervical Cancer in China.” PLoS
One 8 (7): e67005.
Kim, J. J., and S. J. Goldie 2008. “Health and Economic
Implications of HPV Vaccination in the United States.”
New England Journal of Medicine 359 (8): 821–32.

Kim, J. J., K. M. Kuntz, N. K. Stout, S. Mahmud, L. L. Villa,
and others. 2007. “Multiparameter Calibration of a Natural
History Model of Cervical Cancer.” American Journal of
Epidemiology 166 (2): 137–50.
Kim, J. J., J. Ortendahl, and S. J. Goldie 2009. “Cost-Effectiveness
of Human Papillomavirus Vaccination and Cervical Cancer
Screening in Women Older than 30 Years in the United
States.” Annals of Internal Medicine 151 (8): 538–45.
LaMontagne, D. S., S. Barge, N. T. Le, E. Mugisha, M. E.
Penny, and others. 2011. “Human Papillomavirus Vaccine
Delivery Strategies That Achieved High Coverage in
Low- and Middle-Income Countries.” Bulletin of the
World Health Organization 89 (11): 821–30.
Le Deu, F., R. Parekh, F. Zhange, and G. Zhou. 2012.“Healthcare
in China: Entering Unchartered Waters.” McKinsey & Co.
http://www.mckinsey.com/insights /health_systems_and
_ services / health_care_in_china_entering_uncharted
_waters.
Levin, C. E., H. V. Minh, J. Odaga, S. S. Rout, N. T. N. Diep, and
others. 2013. “Incremental Costs of Strategies to Deliver
Human Papillomavirus Vaccine to Young Adolescent Girls
in Peru, Uganda, and Viet Nam.” Bulletin of the World
Health Organization 91: 585–92.
Levin, C. E., J. Sellors, J. F. Shi, L. Ma, Y. L. Qiao, and others. 2010.
“Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Cervical Cancer Prevention
Based on a Rapid Human Papillomavirus Screening Test
in a High-Risk Region of China.” International Journal of
Cancer 127 (6): 1404–11.
Li, J., L.-N. Kang, and Y.-L. Qiao. 2011. “Review of the Cervical
Cancer Disease Burden in Mainland China.” Asian Pacific
Journal of Cancer Prevention 12: 1149–53.
Li, J., L. K. Li, J.-F. Ma, L. H. Wei, M. Niyazi, and others.
2009. “Knowledge and Attitudes about Human
Papillomavirus (HPV) and HPV Vaccines among Women
Living in Metropolitan and Rural Regions of China.”
Vaccine 27 (8): 1210–15.
Li, R., Q. Zhou, M. Li, S. M. Tong, M. He, and others.
2013. “Evaluation of Visual Inspection as the Primary
Screening Method in a Four-Year Cervical (Pre-) Cancer
Screening Program in Rural China.” Tropical Doctor 43
(3): 96–99.
Liu, W., J. D. Clemens, J. Yang, and Z. Xu. 2006. “Immunization
against Japanese Encephalitis in China: A Policy Analysis.”
Vaccine 24: 5178–82.
Lu, Y. 2013. “HPV Vaccines among Chinese Women Still a
Long Way Off.” People’s Daily Online, July 24. http://english
.people.com.cn/90882/8339695.html.
Qiao, Y. L. 2010. “Perspective of Cervical Cancer Prevention
and Control in Developing Countries and Areas.” Chinese
Journal of Cancer 29 (1): 1–31.
Qiao, Y. L., J. W. Sellors, P. S. Eder, Y. B. Bao, J. M. Lim, and
others. 2008. “A New HPV-DNA Test for Cervical Cancer
Screening in Developing Regions: A Cross-Sectional Study
of Clinical Accuracy in Rural China.” The Lancet Oncology
9 (10): 929–36.

Shi, J. F., K. Canfell, J. B. Lew, and Y. L. Qiao. 2012.
“The Burden of Cervical Cancer in China: Synthesis of
the Evidence.” International Journal of Cancer 130 (3):
641–52.
Shi, J. F., K. Canfell, J. B. Lew, F. H. Zhao, R. Legood, and
others. 2011. “Evaluation of Primary HPV-DNA Testing
in Relation to Visual Inspection Methods for Cervical
Cancer Screening in Rural China: An Epidemiologic and
Cost-Effectiveness Modelling Study.” BMC Cancer 11: 239.
doi:10.1186/1471–2407–11–239.
Shi, J. F., J. F. Chen, K. Canfell, X. X. Feng, J. F. Ma, and
others. 2012. “Estimation of the Costs of Cervical Cancer
Screening, Diagnosis and Treatment in Rural Shanxi
Province, China: A Micro-Costing Study.” BMC Health
Services Research 12: 123.
The Lancet. 2009. “Women’s Health in Rural China.” The Lancet
374 (9687): 358. doi:10.1016/S0140-6736(09)61394-5.
Tsu, V., and C. Levin. 2008. “Making the Case for Cervical
Cancer Prevention: What about Equity?” Reproductive
Health Matters 16 (32): 104–12.
Verguet, S., C. Gauvreau, S. Mishra, M. MacLennan, S. Murphy,
and others. 2015. “The Consequences of Tobacco Tax on
Household Health and Finances in Rich and Poor Smokers
in China: An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.”
The Lancet Global Health 3 (4): e206-16. doi:10.1016
/s2214-109x(15)70095-1.
Verguet, S., R. Laxminarayan, and D. T. Jamison. 2015.
“Universal Public Finance of Tuberculosis Treatment in
India: An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis.” Health
Economics 24: 318–22.
Verguet, S., S. Murphy, B. Anderson, K. A. Johansson, R. Glass,
and others. 2013. “Public Finance of Rotavirus Vaccination
in India and Ethiopia: An Extended Cost-Effectiveness
Analysis.” Vaccine 31 (42): 4902–10.
Wang, J. L., Y. Z. Yang, W. W. Dong, J. Sun, H. T. Tao, and
others. 2013. “Application of Human Papillomavirus
in Screening for Cervical Cancer and Precancerous
Lesions.” Asian Pacific Journal of Cancer Prevention 14
(5): 2979–82.
WHO (World Health Organization). 2006. Comprehensive
Cervical Cancer Control: A Guide to Essential Practice.
Geneva: WHO.
———. 2011. “WHO Life Tables.” http://www.who.int/gho
/mortality_burden_disease/life_tables/life_tables/en.
———. 2012. Study on Global AGEing and Adult Health—
2007/2010, WAVE 1. Geneva: WHO. http://apps.who.int
/healthinfo/systems/surveydata/index.php/catalog/13.
———. 2013a. WHO Vaccine-Preventable Diseases: Monitoring
System 2013 Global Summary. Geneva: WHO.
———. 2013b. The World Health Report 2013: Research for
Universal Health Coverage. Geneva: WHO.
———. “Global Health Observatory (GHO) data.” http://
www.who.int/gho/en/.
World Bank. 2013a. World Development Indicators 2013.
Washington, DC: World Bank.

An Extended Cost-Effectiveness Analysis of Publicly Financed HPV Vaccination to Prevent Cervical Cancer in China

305

———. 2013b. “PovCalNet: An Online Analysis Tool for
Global Poverty Monitoring.” Development Research Group,
World Bank, Washington, DC. http://iresearch.worldbank.
org/PovcalNet/index.htm.
Yip, W. C., W. C. Hsiao, W. Chen, S. Hu, J. Ma, and others. 2012.
“Early Appraisal of China’s Huge and Complex Health Care
Reforms.” The Lancet 379 (9818): 833–42.
Zhang, S. K., X. F. Pan, S. M. Wang, C. X. Yang, X. H. Gao,
and others. 2013. “Perceptions and Acceptability of
HPV Vaccination among Parents of Young Adolescents:

306

Cancer

A Multicenter National Survey in China.” Vaccine 31 (32):
3244–49.
Zhang, W. J., F. Li, Y. H. Wang, D. Simayi, A. Saimaiti,
and others. 2013. “The Case of Semi-Mandatory HPV
Vaccination in China.” Nature Biotechnology 31: 590–91.
Zhao, F. H., J. Jeronimo, Y. L. Qiao, J. Schweizer, W. Chen,
and others. 2013. “An Evaluation of Novel, Lower-Cost
Molecular Screening Tests for Human Papillomavirus
in Rural China.” Cancer Prevention Research 6 (9):
938–48.

DCP3 Series Acknowledgments

Disease Control Priorities, third edition (DCP3) compiles the global health knowledge of institutions
and experts from around the world, a task that
required the efforts of over 500 individuals, including
volume editors, chapter authors, peer reviewers, advisory committee members, and research and staff assistants. For each of these contributions we convey our
acknowledgement and appreciation. First and foremost, we would like to thank our 31 volume editors
who provided the intellectual vision for their volumes
based on years of professional work in their respective
fields, and then dedicated long hours to reviewing each
chapter, providing leadership and guidance to authors,
and framing and writing the summary chapters.
We also thank our chapter authors who collectively
volunteered their time and expertise to writing over
160 comprehensive, evidence-based chapters.
We owe immense gratitude to the institutional sponsor of this effort: The Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
The Foundation provided sole financial support of
the Disease Control Priorities Network. Many thanks
to Program Officers Kathy Cahill, Philip Setel, Carol
Medlin, and (currently) Damian Walker for their
thoughtful interactions, guidance, and encouragement
over the life of the project. We also wish to thank
Jaime Sepúlveda for his longstanding support, including
chairing the Advisory Committee for the second edition
and, more recently, demonstrating his vision for DCP3
while he was a special advisor to the Gates Foundation.
We are also grateful to the University of Washington’s
Department of Global Health and successive chairs
King Holmes and Judy Wasserheit for providing a
home base for the DCP3 Secretariat, which included
intellectual collaboration, logistical coordination, and
administrative support.

We thank the many contractors and consultants
who provided support to specific volumes in the form
of economic analytical work, volume coordination,
chapter drafting, and meeting organization: the Center
for Disease Dynamics, Economics, & Policy; Center
for Chronic Disease Control; Center for Global Health
Research; Emory University; Evidence to Policy Initiative;
Public Health Foundation of India; QURE Healthcare;
University of California, San Francisco; University of
Waterloo; University of Queensland; and the World
Health Organization.
We are tremendously grateful for the wisdom and
guidance provided by our advisory committee to the
editors. Steered by Chair Anne Mills, the advisory committee assures quality and intellectual rigor of the highest order for DCP3.
The U.S. Institute of Medicine, in collaboration with
the Interacademy Medical Panel, coordinated the peerreview process for all DCP3 chapters. Patrick Kelley, Gillian
Buckley, Megan Ginivan, and Rachel Pittluck managed
this effort and provided critical and substantive input.
The World Bank External and Corporate Relations
Publishing and Knowledge division provided exceptional guidance and support throughout the demanding
production and design process. We would particularly
like to thank Carlos Rossel, the publisher; Mary Fisk,
Nancy Lammers, Devlan O’Connor, Rumit Pancholi,
and Deborah Naylor for their diligence and expertise.
Additionally, we thank Jose de Buerba, Mario Trubiano,
Yulia Ivanova, and Chiamaka Osuagwu of the World
Bank for providing professional counsel on communications and marketing strategies.
Several U.S. and international institutions contributed to the organization and execution of meetings that
supported the preparation and dissemination of DCP3.

307

We would like to express our appreciation to the
following institutions:
• University of Bergen, consultation on equity (June
2011)
• University of California, San Francisco, surgery
volume consultations (April 2012, October 2013,
February 2014)
• Institute of Medicine, first meeting of the Advisory
Committee to the Editors ACE (March 2013)
• Harvard Global Health Institute, consultation
on policy measures to reduce incidence of noncommunicable diseases (July 2013)
• Institute of Medicine, systems strengthening meeting
(September 2013)
• Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics, and Policy
(Quality and Uptake meeting September 2013,

308

DCP3 Series Acknowledgments

reproductive and maternal health volume consultation November 2013)
• National Cancer Institute cancer consultation
(November 2013)
• Union for International Cancer Control cancer
consultation (November 2013, December 2014)
Carol Levin provided outstanding governance for
cost and cost-effectiveness analysis. Stéphane Verguet
added invaluable guidance in applying and improving
the extended cost-effectiveness analysis method. Shane
Murphy, Zachary Olson, Elizabeth Brouwer, and Kristen
Danforth provided exceptional research assistance and
analytic assistance. Brianne Adderley ably managed the
budget and project processes. The efforts of these individuals were absolutely critical to producing this series
and we are thankful for their commitment.

Volume and Series Editors

VOLUME EDITORS
Hellen Gelband is Associate Director for Policy at the
Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy
(CDDEP). Her work spans infectious disease, particularly malaria and antibiotic resistance, and noncommunicable disease policy, mainly in low- and middle-income
countries. Before joining CDDEP, then Resources for the
Future, she conducted policy studies at the (former)
Congressional Office of Technology Assessment, the
Institute of Medicine of the U.S. National Academies,
and a number of international organizations.
Prabhat Jha is the founding director of the Centre for
Global Health Research at St. Michael’s Hospital and
holds Endowed and Canada Research Chairs in Global
Health in the Dalla Lana School of Public Health at
the University of Toronto. He is lead investigator of
the Million Death Study in India, which quantifies the
causes of death and key risk factors in over two million
homes over a 14-year period. He is also Scientific
Director of the Statistical Alliance for Vital Events,
which aims to expand reliable measurement of causes of
death worldwide. His research includes the epidemiology and economics of tobacco control worldwide.
Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan is head of the Early
Detection and Prevention Section and the Screening
Group at the World Health Organization’s International
Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC) in Lyon, France.
He was trained in radiation oncology at the University
of Pittsburgh and the University of Cambridge. He is
an expert in evaluating early detection strategies and
has conducted trials of screening interventions for cervical, oral, and breast cancers in a number of low- and

middle-income countries. Aided by collaborative relationships with other international and national organizations and individual researchers, he provides technical
assistance to countries developing public health policies
that include cancer. His manuals on early detection of
cervical cancer have been translated into several languages, including Chinese, French, Hindi, Portuguese,
Spanish and Turkish, and others.
Susan Horton is Professor at the University of Waterloo
and holds the Centre for International Governance
Innovation (CIGI) Chair in Global Health Economics
in the Balsillie School of International Affairs there.
She has consulted for the World Bank, the Asian
Development Bank, several United Nations agencies,
and the International Development Research Centre,
among others in work carried out in over 20 low- and
middle-income countries. She led the work on nutrition
for the Copenhagen Consensus in 2008, when micronutrients were ranked as the top development priority.
She has served as associate provost of graduate studies
at the University of Waterloo, vice-president academic at
Wilfrid Laurier University in Waterloo, and interim dean
at the University of Toronto at Scarborough.

SERIES EDITORS
Dean T. Jamison
Dean Jamison is a Senior Fellow in Global Health
Sciences at the University of California, San Francisco,
and an Emeritus Professor of Global Health at the
University of Washington. He previously held academic appointments at Harvard University and the

309

University of California, Los Angeles; he was an economist on the staff of the World Bank, where he was lead
author of the World Bank’s World Development Report
1993: Investing in Health. He was lead editor of DCP2.
He holds a PhD in economics from Harvard University
and is an elected member of the Institute of Medicine
of the U.S. National Academy of Sciences. He recently
served as Co-Chair and Study Director of The Lancet’s
Commission on Investing in Health.
Rachel Nugent
Rachel Nugent is a Research Associate Professor in
the Department of Global Health at the University
of Washington. She was formerly Deputy Director of
Global Health at the Center for Global Development,
Director of Health and Economics at the Population
Reference Bureau, Program Director of Health and
Economics Programs at the Fogarty International Center
of the National Institutes of Health, and senior economist at the Food and Agriculture Organization of
the United Nations. From 1991–97, she was associate
professor and department chair in economics at Pacific
Lutheran University. She has advised the World Health
Organization, the U.S. government, and nonprofit organizations on the economics and policy environment of
noncommunicable diseases.

310

Volume and Series Editors

Hellen Gelband
See the list of Volume Editors.
Susan Horton
See the list of Volume Editors.
Prabhat Jha
See the list of Volume Editors.
Ramanan Laxminarayan
Ramanan Laxminarayan is Vice President for Research
and Policy at the Public Health Foundation of India, and
he directs the Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics
& Policy in Washington, D.C., and New Delhi. His
research deals with the integration of epidemiological
models of infectious diseases and drug resistance into
the economic analysis of public health problems. He was
one of the key architects of the Affordable Medicines
Facility for malaria, a novel financing mechanism to
improve access and delay resistance to antimalarial
drugs. In 2012, he created the Immunization Technical
Support Unit in India, which has been credited with
improving immunization coverage in the country. He
teaches at Princeton University.

Contributors

Isaac F. Adewole
University of Ibadan, Ibadan, Nigeria

Wendong Chen
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Hemantha Amarasinghe
Institute of Oral Health, Maharagama, Sri Lanka

James Cleary
University of Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin,
United States

Benjamin O. Anderson
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States

Anil D’Cruz
Tata Memorial Hospital, Mumbai, India

Federico G. Antillon
Universidad Francisco Marroquin, Guatemala City,
Guatemala

Anna J. Dare
Centre for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s
Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Samira Asma
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States

Lynette Denny
University of Cape Town, Groote Schuur Hospital,
Cape Town, South Africa

Rifat Atun
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts, United
States

Craig Earle
Cancer Care Ontario, Ontario Institute for Cancer
Research, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

Rajendra A. Badwe
Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India
Freddie Bray
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France
Frank J. Chaloupka
University of Illinois at Chicago, Chicago, Illinois,
United States
Ann Chao
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States
Chien-Jen Chen
National Taiwan University, Taipei, Taiwan, China

Silvia Franceschi
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France
Cindy L. Gauvreau
Centre for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s
Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Hellen Gelband
Center for Disease Dynamics, Economics & Policy,
Washington, DC, United States
Ophira M. Ginsburg
Dalla Lana School of Public Health, University of
Toronto, Toronto, Canada; BRAC University, Dhaka,
Bangladesh

311

Mary K. Gospodarowicz
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada
Thomas Gross
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States
Prakash C. Gupta
Healis Sehksaria Institute for Public Health, Mumbai,
India
Sumit Gupta
Toronto Hospital for Sick Children, Toronto, Canada
Sir Andrew Hall
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France
Mhamed Harif
CHU Mohammed VI, Marrakesh, Morocco
Rolando Herrero
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon, France
Susan Horton
University of Waterloo, Waterloo, Ontario, Canada
Scott C. Howard
University of Tennessee Health Sciences Center,
Memphis, Tennessee, United States
Stephen P. Hunger
Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, Philadelphia,
Pennsylvania, United States
Andre Ilbawi
MD Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, Texas,
United States
Trijn Israels
Academisch Medisch Centrum, Amsterdam, the
Netherlands

Felicia Knaul
Miami Institute for the Americas, and Miller School of
Medicine, University of Miami, Florida, United States
Carol Levin
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States
Joseph Lipscomb
Emory University, Atlanta, Georgia, United States
W. Thomas London
Fox Chase Cancer Center, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States
Mary MacLennan
Centre for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s
Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Katherine A. McGlynn
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States
Monika L. Metzger
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis,
Tennessee, United States
Raul H. Murillo
National Cancer Institute of Colombia, Bogotá,
Colombia
Zachary Olson
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington,
United States
Sherif Omar
Cairo University, Cairo, Arab Republic of Egypt

David A. Jaffray
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, TECHNA Institute,
Toronto, Ontario

Krishna Palipudi
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Atlanta,
Georgia, United States

Dean T. Jamison
University of California, San Francisco, and University
of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States

C. S. Pramesh
Tata Memorial Centre, Mumbai, India

Prabhat Jha
Centre for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s
Hospital, Dalla Lana School of Public Health,
University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada
Newell Johnson
Griffith University, Gold Coast, Australia
Jamal Khader
King Hussein Cancer Center, Amman, Jordan

312

Jane J. Kim
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
United States

Contributors

You-Lin Qiao
Cancer Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China
Linda Rabeneck
Cancer Care Ontario, University of Toronto, Toronto,
Canada
Preetha Rajaraman
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States

Kunnambath Ramadas
Regional Cancer Centre, Trivandrum, India
Chinthanie Ramasundarahettige
Centre for Global Health Research, St. Michael’s
Hospital, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada

David B. Thomas
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States
Edward L. Trimble
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States

Timothy Rebbeck
University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania,
United States

Joann Trypuc
Princess Margaret Cancer Centre, Toronto, Canada

Carlos Rodriguez-Galindo
Harvard University, Cambridge, Massachusetts,
United States

Stéphane Verguet
Department of Global Health and Population,
Harvard T. H. Chan School of Public Health, Boston,
Massachusetts, United States

Rengaswamy Sankaranarayanan
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France

Judith Wagner
Independent economic consultant, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States

Monisha Sharma
University of Washington, Seattle, Washington, United
States

Shao-Ming Wang
Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China

Ju-Fang Shi
Cancer Institute, Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences,
Peking Union Medical College, Beijing, China

Christopher P. Wild
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France

Isabelle Soerjomataram
International Agency for Research on Cancer, Lyon,
France
Lisa Stevens
National Cancer Institute, Bethesda, Maryland,
United States
Sujha Subramanian
RTI International, Waltham, Massachusetts,
United States

Pooja Yerramilli
Harvard Global Equity Initiative, Harvard University,
Cambridge, Massachusetts, United States
Cheng-Har Yip
University of Malaya Medical Centre, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia
Ayda Yurekli
Independent economist, Ithaca, New York, United States
Witold Zatoński
Maria Sklodowska-Curie Cancer Centre, Warsaw, Poland

Richard Sullivan
Kings College London, King’s Health Partners, London,
United Kingdom

Ann G. Zauber
Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center, New York,
New York, United States

Terrence Sullivan
University of Toronto, Canadian Partnership Against
Cancer, Toronto, Canada

Fang-Hui Zhao
Cancer Institute/Hospital, Chinese Academy of Medical
Sciences, Beijing, China

Contributors

313

Advisory Committee to the Editors

Anne Mills, Chair
Professor, London School of Hygiene & Tropical
Medicine, London, United Kingdom

Roger Glass
Director, Fogarty International Center, National
Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland, United States

Olusoji Adeyi
Director, Health, Nutrition and Population Global
Practice, World Bank, Washington, DC, United States

Amanda Glassman
Director, Global Health Policy, Center for Global
Development, Washington, DC, United States

Kesetebirhan Admasu
Minister of Health, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia

Glenda Gray
Executive Director, Perinatal HIV Research Unit, Chris
Hani Baragwanath Hospital, Johannesburg, South
Africa

George Alleyne
Director Emeritus, Pan American Health Organization,
Washington, DC, United States
Ala Alwan
Director, World Health Organization, Regional Office
for the Eastern Mediterranean, Cairo, Arab Republic of
Egypt

Demissie Habte
Chair of Board of Trustees, International Clinical
Epidemiological Network, Addis Ababa, Ethiopia
Richard Horton
Editor, The Lancet, London, United Kingdom

Rifat Atun
Professor, Global Health Systems, Harvard University,
Boston, Massachusetts, United States

Edward Kirumira
Dean, Faculty of Social Sciences, Makerere University,
Kampala, Uganda

Zulfiqar Bhutta
Chair, Division of Women and Child Health, Aga Khan
University Hospital, Karachi, Pakistan

Peter Lachmann
Professor, University of Cambridge, Cambridge,
United Kingdom

Agnes Binagwaho
Minister of Health, Kigali, Rwanda

Lai Meng Looi
Professor, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia

Mark Blecher
Senior Health Advisor, South Africa Treasury
Department, Cape Town, South Africa
Patricia Garcia
Dean, School of Public Health, Universidad Peruana
Cayetano Heredia, Lima, Peru

Adel Mahmoud
Senior Molecular Biologist, Princeton University,
Princeton, New Jersey, United States
Anthony Measham
World Bank (retired)

315

Carol Medlin
Children’s Investment Fund Foundation, London,
United Kingdom
Alvaro Moncayo
Researcher, Universidad de los Andes, Bogotá, Colombia
Jaime Montoya
Executive Director, Philippine Council for Health
Research and Development, Taguig City, the Philippines
Ole Norheim
Professor, University of Bergen, Bergen, Norway
Folashade Omokhodion
Professor, University College Hospital, Ibadan, Nigeria
Toby Ord
President, Giving What We Can, Oxford, United Kingdom
K. Srinath Reddy
President, Public Health Foundation of India, New
Delhi, India

316

Richard Skolnik
Lecturer, Health Policy Department, Yale School
of Public Health, New Haven, Connecticut,
United States
Stephen Tollman
Professor, University of Witwatersrand, Johannesburg,
South Africa
Jürgen Unutzer
Professor, Department of Psychiatry, University of
Washington, Seattle, Washington, United States
Damian Walker
Senior Program Officer, Bill & Melinda Gates
Foundation, Seattle, Washington, United States
Ngaire Woods
Director, Global Economic Governance Program,
Oxford University, Oxford, United Kingdom

Sevkat Ruacan
Dean, Koc University School of Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey

Nopadol Wora-Urai
Professor, Department of Surgery, Phramongkutklao
Hospital, Bangkok, Thailand

Jaime Sepúlveda
Executive Director, Global Health Sciences, University
of California, San Francisco, California, United States

Kun Zhao
Researcher, China National Health Development
Research Center, Beijing, China

Advisory Committee to the Editors

Reviewers

Nicolas Andre, MD, PhD
Pediatric Oncology, Children’s Hospital of La Timone,
AP-HM Marseille, France
Ronald D. Barr, MD
Professor of Pediatrics, Pathology, and Medicine,
McMaster University, Hamilton, Ontario, Canada
Nazmi Bilir, MD
Professor of Public Health, Faculty of Medicine,
Hacettepe University, Ankara, Turkey
Miguela A. Caniza, MD
Associate Member, Director of Infectious Diseases,
International Outreach, Department of Infectious
Diseases, International Outreach Program, St. Jude
Children’s Research Hospital, Memphis, Tennessee,
United States
Phaik-Leng Cheah, MBBS, MRC Path, FRC Path,
MPath, MD
Professor, Department of Pathology, Faculty of
Medicine, University of Malaya, Kuala Lumpur,
Malaysia
Maria Paula Curado, MD, PhD
Senior Researcher, International Prevention Research
Institute, and Epidemiologist, Accamargo Cancer
Center, International Research Center, Sao Paulo, Brasil
Henry Ddungu, MD, consultant
Uganda Cancer Institute, Kampala, Uganda
Nagi S. El Saghir, MD, FACP
Professor of Clinical Medicine, Director, Breast Center
of Excellence, NK Basile Cancer Institute, Division
of Hematology/Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, American University of Beirut Medical
Center, Beirut, Lebanon

Dan Greenberg, PhD
Associate Professor and Chairman, Department
of Health Systems Management, Guilford Glazer
Faculty of Business Management & Faculty of
Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev,
Beersheba, Israel
Raymond Hutubessy, PhD
Senior Health Economist, Initiative for Vaccine
Research, World Health Organization, Geneva,
Switzerland
M. Tezer Kutluk, MD, PhD
Professor of Pediatrics and Pediatric Oncologist,
Hacettepe University Cancer Institute, Ankara, Turkey
Cédric Mahé, PhD
Senior Director, Global Epidemiology, Sanofi Pasteur,
Lyon, France
Donald Maxwell Parkin, MD, PhD
Senior Epidemiologist, Centre for Cancer
Prevention, Wolfson Institute of Preventive Medicine,
Queen Mary University of London, London,
United Kingdom
Aloka Pathirana MS, FRCS (Eng), FRCS (Edin)
Professor in Surgery, University of Sri Jayewardenepura,
Nugegoda, Sri Lanka
Sevket Ruacan, MD
Professor of Pathology, Koc University School of
Medicine, Istanbul, Turkey
Vikash Sewram, PhD (Medicine, Chemistry,
and Physiology), MPH (Cancer Epidemiology),
PhD (Public Health)
Director, African Cancer Institute, Stellenbosch
University, Stellenbosch, South Africa

317

Frank A. Sloan, PhD
J. Alexander McMahon Professor of Health Policy
and Management and Professor of Economics, Duke
University, Durham, North Carolina, United States
Verna Dnk Vanderpuye, MBCHB, FWACS
Consultant Radiation and Clinical Oncologist,
Department of Radiation Oncology, Korle Bu Teaching
Hospital, Accra, Ghana
Katsuri Warnakulasuriya, Oral Med BDS, FDSRCS,
PhD, Dip, DSc
Professor of Oral Medicine and Experimental
Oral Pathology, King’s College London, London,
United Kingdom

318

Reviewers

Sidney J. Winawer, MD
Paul Sherlock Chair in Medicine,
Gastroenterology and Nutrition
Service, Department of Medicine, Memorial
Sloan-Kettering Cancer Center; Professor
of Medicine, Weill Medical College,
Cornell University, Ithaca, New York,
United States
Cheng-Har Yip, MBBS, FRCSEd, FRCS
Consultant breast surgeon, Breast Centre, Sime Darby
Medical Centre, Selangor, Malaysia

Index

Boxes, figures, maps, notes, and tables are indicated by b, f, m, n, and t respectively.
A
abandonment of therapy
for breast cancer, 266, 292
for childhood cancer, 124, 125, 125t, 126–27b, 127,
130, 205, 205b, 291
due to expense, 282
Abascal, W., 189
accreditation programs, 125, 195, 199, 200, 203,
207n10, 244
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL). See leukemia
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), 126b
ADA (American Dental Association), 91
Adami, H., 215
Adewole, Isaac F., 223
adjuvant treatment considerations for surgery,
230–31
advertising of cigarettes, 185, 189
affordability of cancer services, 15. See also catastrophic
health expenditures
abandonment of therapy due to inability to
afford, 127
anti-HBV drugs, 158
anti-HCV drugs, 156
Afghanistan, radiation therapy in, 265
aflatoxins, 11, 150, 151, 153, 156–57, 159
Africa. See also specific regions and countries
cervical cancer prevention approaches in, 80
types of cancer in, 29
AHOPCA (Central American Association of Pediatric
Hematology Oncology), 130
air pollution, 12, 38
alcohol consumption
binge drinking, 157
liver cancer and, 153–54, 157

oral cancer and, 85, 87, 89
as risk factor, 37
Algeria, cervical cancer in, 71
ALL (acute lymphoblastic leukemia). See leukemia
Amarasinghe, Hemantha, 85
American Board of Internal Medicine’s Choosing
Wisely campaign, 212
American Cancer Society Cancer Prevention
Studies, 254
American Dental Association (ADA), 91
American Pain Society, 166
American Society of Clinical Oncology, 111, 212
AMPATH Program (U.S.), 245
Anderson, Benjamin O., 45, 216, 223, 263, 268
anesthesia, administration of, 137–38, 224, 226
Antillon, Federico G., 121
antiretroviral therapy, 73, 156
antiviral therapy for HBV and HCV, 155–56, 158,
159, 160
APL (acute promyelocytic leukemia), 126b
areca nut. See nut chewing
Argentina
colorectal cancer in, 11, 108
tobacco control, compared to Uruguay, 189
aromatase inhibitor (AI), 12b, 54, 60
asbestos exposure, 12, 38
Asia. See also specific regions and countries
breast cancer in, 216
cervical cancer in, 71, 71m
childhood cancer in, 121
health insurance coverage in, 289
liver cancer in, 147, 150
oral cancer in, 85, 87
types of cancer in, 29

319

Asian Development Bank, 188
Asma, Samira, 175
Atun, Rifat, 281, 284
Australia/New Zealand
cancer registries in, 266
cigarettes in
plain packaging of, 185, 189
tax rates, 184
cost-effectiveness study in, 267
lung cancer in, 177
oral cancer in, 88
reporting system for HPV infection and
vaccinations in, 258
Austria, cervical cancer screening in, 74
Axios Healthcare Development, 78
B
Badwe, Rajendra A., 223
Baltussen, R. M., 59, 216
Bamako Global Ministerial Forum on Research in
Health (2008), 249
Call to Action for Research on Health, 249, 250b, 256
Bangladesh
cervical cancer in, 71, 74
costs of cancer treatments in, 7, 236
smoking in, 178, 180
Belarus, oral cancer in, 85
benefits of cancer control, 17. See also cost-effectiveness
“best buys”
in cancer services, 8
in research, 259–60
betel nut. See nut chewing, as oral cancer risk
bevacizumab, 13
Bhakta, N., 138–39
BHGI. See Breast Health Global Initiative
Bhutan, HPV vaccination in, 78
Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation, 189
binge drinking, 157
biobanks and biological resource centers, 252–53
biopsy procedures, 54, 63, 227–28. See also
tissue sampling
biostatisticians, 257
bladder cancer
radiation therapy for, 240
schistosomiasis and, 12
blood donations/transfusions and HCV risk,
153, 155, 158
Bloomberg Philanthropies, 189
Bolivia, HPV vaccination in, 78
bone marrow transplantation, 129, 197b, 204, 240
B. P. Koirala Memorial Cancer Hospital (Nepal), 206b
brachytherapy, 241
brain cancer

320

Index

incidence and death rates, 28f
radiation therapy for, 240
underdiagnosis of childhood brain tumors, 121
Bray, Freddie, 23
Brazil
breast cancer treatment in, 60
childhood cancer in
cost-effectiveness of treatment, 139
mortality rates, 123
treatment, 127b
colorectal cancer incidence rates in, 103
costs of intervention packages in, 13, 277
oral cancer in, 85
percent of total health spending to cancer
control in, 15
radiation therapy in, 245
smoking in, 180
knowledge of health information, 184
tobacco use in, 10
breast cancer, 45–68. See also Breast Health
Global Initiative
abandonment of therapy, 266, 292
access to diagnostic and treatment facilities, 225
assessment of local situation, 57–59
social and cultural barriers, 58
target group identification, 58–59
breast awareness education, 50t, 52, 215
breast self-examination, 52, 216
chemotherapy, 11, 12b, 54–55, 55–56t, 275
clinical breast examination (CBE), 51–52, 60, 63,
215–16, 235, 266, 277
clinical evaluation, 53–54
clinic-based cluster randomized trial, 62–63
combination screening-treatment interventions,
60–61
comparison of modalities, 61
cost-effectiveness of interventions, 13, 13f, 59–61,
268, 269–70t
dedicated cancer center (Egypt), 206b
diagnosis, treatment, and patient triage, 63
diagnosis guidelines, 53–54, 53t
diagnostic imaging, 54
disparities in global outcomes, 45–47
early-stage treatment of, 8, 11, 29, 60
cost-effectiveness of, 13, 13f
costs of, 14t
early detection, 45, 47, 49, 50t, 60
in LMICs, 12b
scaling up, 16
economic analyses and future of breast health
care in LMICs, 63–64
estrogen receptor protein, testing for, 11, 12b
field studies, 61–63

by geographical region, 29
high-risk screening, 212
incidence and death rates, 6t, 8f, 27–29, 28f, 45,
46m, 215
disproportionate death rates of the young, 45
by income group, 31f, 47–48f, 224f
transitions in low- and middle-income countries,
29–32
intervention packages, 9t
literature review, 59–60
mammographic screening. See mammograms
overdiagnosis concerns, 213, 215
population-based randomized trial, 62
radiation therapy for, 11, 54, 55–56t, 60, 240
rate of curing, 4b
resource limitations, need for guidelines to address,
48–49
risk factors and risk reduction strategies, 47–48
screening for, 10–11, 212, 215–16
cost-effectiveness of, 13f
gender inequity as issue, 214
HIV-positive women, 219
maternal or reproductive health policy as
umbrella for, 219
priority in LMICs, 218
surgery, 54, 223, 226, 228, 229t, 230
survivor groups, formation of, 58, 58f
systemic pharmacotherapy, 54–57
temporal trends in stage of disease, 61–62
tissue sampling, 54, 63
treatment guidelines, 54–57, 55–56t
tumor markers, 54
Breast Health Global Initiative (BHGI)
design of, 48–49
early detection guidelines, 49–57, 50t
effectiveness of, 267
evidence-based, resource-stratified approach, 216
Ghana-Norway partnership as part of, 199
guidelines developed by, 12b, 198, 218
implementation, 57–59
resource levels, 49b, 263–64
Bretthauer, M., 215
British doctors, cohort study of, 254
British Royal College of Physicians, 185
burden of cancer, 23–44. See also specific types of cancer
alcohol consumption and, 37
asbestos exposure and, 38
compared to other noncommunicable diseases,
24, 24f
diet and, 37–38
diversity of cancer by type and geographical
region, 29
environmental factors, 38

hormonal and reproductive factors, 38
HPVs and hepatitis B and C viruses and, 36–37
by income group, 27–29, 31, 31–35f
infections, cancers associated with, 36–37, 37f
key indicators of, 24–27
incidence, 25
income as proxy for human development, 26
mortality, 25–26
proportion of burden attributable to risk factors,
26–27
obesity and, 37–38
occupational risk factors, 38
overview, 6–7, 6t, 8f, 8t, 17, 23–24
physical activity, lack of, 38
projected (2030), 9t, 17, 31–32, 36f
risk factors, 33–34
sun exposure and skin cancer, 38
surgically treatable cancers in LMICs, 224, 224f
surveillance mechanisms, need for, 39–40
tobacco-related cancer, 32, 34–36
transitions of various types of cancers, 23, 29–32
Burkitt, Denis, 134
Burkitt lymphoma, 11, 123, 129t, 134–37, 136t
C
Cambodia
cervical cancer in, 71
HPV vaccination in, 78
liver fluke infection in, 154
Cameroon
costs of cancer treatments in, 7, 236
HPV vaccination in, 78
Canada
Canadian National Breast Screening Study, 215
Cancer Care Ontario’s Program in Evidence-Based
Care, 198
childhood leukemia in, 122
colorectal screening program (ColonCancerCheck)
in, 108
liver cancer, cost of treatment in, 159
radiation therapy in, 245
smoking in
excise tax increases, 184
inverse relationship of consumption and
price, 183, 183f
smuggling and black market sales of
cigarettes, 187
taxation to finance universal health coverage in, 284
Victoria Hospice (Victoria, British Columbia), 206b
cancer awareness
breast awareness education, 50t, 52, 215
cultural practices and, 225
public awareness of, 16, 255

Index

321

Cancer Care Ontario’s Program in Evidence-Based
Care, 198
cancer death rates. See also specific types of cancer
decreases (2000 to 2010), 6, 8t, 17
in high-income countries (HICs), 2–3m, 6t, 8f
as key indicator of burden of cancer, 25–26
in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs),
2–3m, 6t, 8f
projected (2030), 9t, 17, 245
by region, 27f
cancer incidence. See also specific types of cancer
as key indicator of burden of cancer, 25, 27f
most common cancers by gender, 30m
projected (2030), 36f
registries compiling information on, 251
Cancer Incidence in Five Continents (IARC), 25, 57, 266
Cancer Intervention and Surveillance Modeling
Network (CISNET), 111
cancer registries. See registries
cancer research. See research support
cancer screening, 211–22. See also specific types of cancer
care pathway for positive results, development of, 214
cost-effectiveness of, 214, 275–76
criteria for, 213
diagonal approach to, 218–19
effectiveness of, 10–11, 275–76
ethical considerations, 214–15
false-positive screening tests, 213
follow-up strategies, 214
high-risk screening, 212
infrastructure, education, and advocacy, 213–14
innovation, role of, 218
lead-time bias and, 212
length bias and, 213
opportunistic vs. organized screening, 108, 211–12,
266, 277
organized screening requirements, 108, 213–15
overdiagnosis concerns, 213, 215
overview, 211
policy considerations, 219
population-based screening, 212
priorities in LMICs, 218
structural obstacles to, 214
target age range of, 212
Wilson-Junger criteria for, 213, 213b
cancer services for comprehensive cancer center. See
comprehensive cancer centers
cancer surveillance systems. See surveillance systems
cancer survival rates, 291. See also specific types of cancer
in high-income countries (HICs), 1, 6t
in low- and middle-income countries (LMICs), 6t
Canfell, K. H., 296
capacity building. See also scaling up

322

Index

radiation therapy and, 275
research support and, 250b
surgery and, 232–35, 275
case-control studies, 253
catastrophic health expenditures, 7, 282, 284, 290
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (U.S.), 252
Central American Association of Pediatric Hematology
Oncology (AHOPCA), 130
Central Asia
alcohol consumption in, 157
cervical cancer in, 69
HPV vaccination in, 79
liver cancer in, 149
Central Europe
colorectal cancer in, 102
liver cancer in, 149
oral cancer in, 88
cervical cancer, 69–84
burden of, 69–71, 216, 295, 300–301
global, 69, 70f
regional, 71, 71m, 72f
chemotherapy, 11, 78, 275
cost-effectiveness of interventions, 8, 13, 78–79, 81,
217, 268, 271t
cytology classification and terminology, 72–73,
297–98
early-stage treatment of, 8, 11
scaling up, 16
epidemiology and biology research, 257
by geographical region, 29
HIV and, 73, 219
HPV infection, integrated research on link to,
257–59, 258–59b. See also HPV (human
papillomavirus) infection
HPV vaccination programs for. See HPV (human
papillomavirus) vaccination
incidence and death rates, 6t, 8f, 27–29, 28f, 69,
215, 216
by income group, 34f, 72f, 224f
median age at death, 71
trends in, 29
integrated research exemplar, 257–59
natural history of, 72
overview, 69
Pap smears and, 69, 73, 74, 216
radiation therapy for, 11, 78, 240
rate of curing, 4b
research support for, 259–60
screening for, 10, 69, 73–77, 74t, 216–17
case study of upscaling VIA, 75
combined HPV vaccination and screening,
80–81, 217
cost-effectiveness of, 80

cryotherapy (screen-and-treat approach), 217
gender inequity as issue, 214
HIV-positive women, 219
HPV testing, 75–77
maternal or reproductive health policy
as umbrella for, 219
priority in LMICs, 218
self-collection by women, 76
target age for, 212
triage of positive HPV tests, 76–77
visual inspection with acetic acid (VIA), 74–75,
217, 266, 277, 297–98
surgery, 228, 229t
treatment of, 9t, 78
costs of, 14t
cetuximab, 13
Chaloupka, Frank. J., 175
Chao, Ann, 249
chemotherapy
breast cancer, 11, 12b, 54–55, 55–56t, 275
Burkitt lymphoma, 135–37
cervical cancer, 11, 78, 275
childhood cancer, 124, 125t, 126, 128, 129t
colorectal cancer, 110, 111, 112, 114, 275
comprehensive cancer center services, 200, 231
in conjunction with radiation therapy, 240, 243
in conjunction with surgery, 231
health insurance coverage and, 290
Hodgkin lymphoma, 131–32, 132t
oral cancer, 94, 275
retinoblastoma, 138
scaling up, 16, 275
Wilms tumor, 133–34
Chen, Chien-Jen, 147
Chen, Wendong, 147
Chennai Prospective Study, 254
childhood cancer, 121–46. See also leukemia
abandonment of therapy, 124, 125, 125t, 126–27b,
127, 127b, 130, 205, 205b, 291
achievability of cure, 123
burden in LMICs of, 121–23
Burkitt lymphoma, 11, 123, 129t, 134–37, 136t
characteristics of most common childhood
cancers, 129t
chemotherapy, 124, 125t, 126, 128, 129t
cost-effectiveness of interventions, 13, 13f, 138–40,
139–40f, 268, 275–76t, 277
costs of interventions, 14t
future directions for progress, 140
in HICs, 121, 126
Hodgkin lymphoma, 129t, 131–33, 132t, 240
incidence rates, 121
inclusion in cancer registries, 121, 122f

ineffectiveness of prevention and screening, 123
International Incidence of Childhood Cancer
(IARC), 123
in LMICs, 123, 125t, 127, 128, 139
locally adapted treatment protocols, 126–27, 139
Mexican national health insurance coverage of, 1
mortality rates, 123
outcome evaluation, 127–28
rate of curing, 4b
retinoblastoma, 137–38
scaling up, 277
spillover effect from pediatric to adult
oncology, 123
treatment of, 11, 123–25
dedicated centers, 123–24, 124t, 128
infrastructure needed in LMICs, 125t
principles of, 126–28
specific cancers, 128–38
treatment facilities, organization of, 9t, 16, 125t
twinning programs, 124–25, 130, 140, 266
underdiagnosis of childhood brain tumors, 121
Wilms tumor, 11, 126, 133–34, 133t, 135t
Children’s Oncology Group in North America, 133
Chile
opioids for pain relief in, 169
training of health care professionals in, 204
China
air pollution in, 38
breast cancer in, 52, 60
cervical cancer in
burden of, 301
screening program, 295–96
childhood cancer treatment in, 125
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 128, 130–31
chronic lung disease in, 178
colorectal cancer in, 103, 111
cost-effectiveness of HPV vaccination in, 295–305.
See also HPV vaccination
costs of intervention packages in, 277
dietary changes in, 150, 156
HBV infection in, 151
HBV vaccination in, 150, 155, 158
HCV infection in, 151
HPV vaccination in, 295–305. See also HPV
vaccination
liver cancer in, 149, 150
liver fluke infection in, 154
national health insurance in, 284, 285t, 289, 290, 292
cancer surgery coverage, 7
co-payments, 291
fee-for-service basis, 292
opioid accessibility in, 170
oral cancer in, 88, 94

Index

323

percent of total health spending to cancer
control in, 15
smoking in, 179, 180
affordability, 182
implications of tobacco taxation, 188
knowledge of health information, 184
male smoking prevalence, 30, 35, 177
price elasticity, 181
related cancer deaths in, 177
starting age of men, 178
stomach cancer in, 218
types of cancer in, 29
China Kadoorie Biobank, 254, 255b
chronic lung disease, 178
chronic trauma, as risk factor for oral cancer, 90
cigarettes. See tobacco taxes; tobacco use
cirrhosis, 147, 150, 151, 153
CISNET (Cancer Intervention and Surveillance
Modeling Network), 111
Cleary, James, 165
clinical breast examination. See breast cancer
Clinton Health Access Initiative, 16
Clonorchis sinensis, 36
Cochrane Collaboration, 91
codeine, 165, 166, 168
cohort studies, 254, 254–55b
Colombia
breast cancer in, 62
childhood cancer in, 16
universal health care in, 284, 285t
cancer coverage, 290, 291
incentives to improve coverage, 292
colonoscopy, 106–7, 217
colorectal cancer (CRC), 101–19
burden of, 101–5, 217
chemotherapy, 110, 111, 112, 114, 275
cost-effectiveness of interventions, 7b, 13, 13f, 114,
217, 268, 272–73t
diagnosis of, 109
diet, lifestyle, and medications as risk factors for,
105, 114, 217
European Guidelines for Quality Assurance in
Colorectal Cancer Screening and Diagnosis
(IARC), 107, 108
genetic factors, 105
high-income countries recommendations, 116
high-risk screening, 212
incidence and death rates, 6t, 8f, 27–29, 28f, 101–5
by gender, 102m, 103–4f, 215
by income group, 33f, 103–5, 105f, 224f
transitions in low- and middle-income
countries, 29
trends, 102–3

324

Index

intervention packages, 9t
low-income countries recommendations, 114
middle-income countries recommendations, 115
overview, 101
physical inactivity, relationship to, 38
radiation therapy for, 110
recommendations, 114–16, 115t
research support for, 260
risk factors, 105
screening for, 11, 101, 105–9, 217
ColonCancerCheck (Canadian program), 108
colonoscopy, 106–7, 217
computerized tomographic colonography
(CTC), 106
cost-effectiveness of, 11, 111–14
fecal DNA, 106
fecal immunochemical test (FIT), 105–6, 277
flexible sigmoidoscopy (FS), 106
guaiac fecal occult blood test (gFOBT), 105, 108
high-risk screening, 212
IARC guidelines, 107, 108–9
ICRCSN pilot program, 108
International Cancer Screening Network, 109
International Digestive Cancer Alliance, 109
organized vs. opportunistic screening, 108
performance of organized screening
programs, 108
USMSTF guidelines, 108
USPSTF guidelines, 107–8
World Endoscopy Organization, 109
staging of, 109–10
barium enema, 109
computerized tomography, 109–10
surgery, 110, 223, 228, 230, 230t
treatment of, 110–11
international partnership arrangements to
support in LMICs, 111
metastatic colorectal cancer, 110–11
Commission on Macroeconomics and Health, 7b
community health centers, 226–27, 228–30t
community health workers, 200, 201, 256, 290
community involvement, 214
comprehensive cancer centers, 195–210
accreditation programs, 207n10
additional key supports, 202
administration and management, 201
affordability and domestic financing of, 15
cancer system components, 195–96, 196f
cancer system planning, 195
chemotherapy, 200, 231
clinical management, 197–98, 198f
clinical practice guidelines, 197–98
patient care plans, 197

clinical services, 198–200, 198f
core services, 198f, 200–202
financial systems, 202
framework, 197–202, 198f
global health, contribution to, 204–5
human resources, 201
infection control, 201–2, 207n9
information technology and management, 201
in LMICs, 196
medical imaging (diagnostic radiology), 199
office- and clinic-based ambulatory care, 199
palliative care, 200
pathology and laboratory medicine, 199
pharmacy services, 201
psychosocial support, 200
quality assurance, 202
quality of care with minimal resources, 202–5
accessibility, 202
catalyzing development of national
systems, 203
effectiveness, 202
efficiency, 203
equity, 202
responsiveness, 202
safety, 202
radiation therapy, 199–200, 243
regional cancer centers, establishment of, 203
role in support of development of effective
health care systems, 204
supportive care, 200
surgery, 199, 232
survivorship programs, 200
systemic cancer therapy, 200
training of health care professionals, 203–4
Congo, Democratic Republic of, liver cancer in, 149
co-payments, 291
cost-effectiveness, 13, 13f, 267–69. See also specific
types of cancer
cancer screening, 214, 275–76
estimates of, 7b
HPV vaccination, cost-effectiveness in China,
295–305. See also HPV (human
papillomavirus) vaccination
methods, 267–68
results based on level of resources,
268–69, 268t
studies of, 263, 267
surgery, 235–36
costs. See also affordability of cancer services;
financing; specific types of cancer
of cancer drugs, 12b
catastrophic health expenditures, 7, 282, 284, 290
DCP3 analysis of, 5b

of interventions, 4b, 7b, 13–14, 14t, 277
priority of reduction for essential intervention
packages, 16
of surgery, 235–36
Council of Europe, 168
CRC. See colorectal cancer
Cuba, oral cancer in, 92, 94
cultural practices
breast cancer and, 58
cancer awareness and, 225
cancer screening and, 214
cervical cancer and, 71
fatalism and, 225
surgery and, 225
Cure4Kids, 125
customs reform to allow for importation of health
research components, 253, 256
cytosine, 186
cytotoxic regimens, 12b
Czech Republic, oral cancer in, 87
D
Dare, Anna J., 223
D’Cruz, Anil, 195
death certificates, indicating smoking habits of
deceased, 185
death rates. See also cancer death rates
top 10 causes of death worldwide, 24, 24f
death registration systems, linking to cancer
registration systems, 253. See also registries
delayed presentation for cancer as norm in LMICs,
213–14, 234, 282, 290
Democratic Republic of Congo, liver cancer in, 149
Denny, Lynette, 69, 268
diagnosis and staging, 11. See also specific types of
cancer
role of laboratories and anatomic pathology, 252
surgery’s diagnostic role, 227
UICC Tumor, Nodes, Metastasis (TNM) staging
system, 92
diagnostic imaging
breast cancer, 54
comprehensive cancer center services, 199
follow-up to positive screening test with, 214
oral cancer and, 92
surgery’s reliance on, 226
diet, relationship to cancer, 37–38
colorectal cancer, 105
liver cancer, 150, 156
digital mammography, 51
Dikshit, R., 253
disability-adjusted life years (DALYs)
cervical cancer and, 71, 216

Index

325

cost-effectiveness and DALYs averted, 13, 214
liver cancer and, 150
Disease Control Priorities
HPV (human papillomavirus) vaccination in
essential package of, 8
publication background of, 5b
DNA testing for HPV. See HPV (human
papillomavirus) infection
Doll, Richard, 176
Dominican Republic
childhood cancer treatment in, 130
universal health care in, 284, 286t, 289
drug costs. See affordability of cancer services
drug therapy. See also chemotherapy; pain relief
breast cancer, 55–56t, 55–57
comprehensive cancer centers, 201
constraints on, 265
as risk factor, 105
smoking cessation treatment, 186
universal health care, coverage of, 290
Dutch Childhood Oncology Group, 130–31
E
Earle, Craig, 101
East Asia and Pacific
aflatoxins in, 153
HBV infection in, 151
HCV infection in, 155
liver cancer in, 147, 149
stomach cancer in, 218
Eastern Europe
colorectal cancer in, 102
oral cancer in, 85, 87
types of cancer in, 29
e-cigarettes, 186
Egypt
breast cancer in, 206b
cervical cancer in, 71
Fakous Cancer Center, 206b
HCV infection in, 151, 153
incidence of HBV vs. HCV in, 151, 152f
liver cancer in, 149
National Cancer Institute, 206b
endrocrine therapy, 54–55, 55–56t
environmental factors, 38
epidemiologic studies, 253–57, 260
Epstein-Barr virus, 36, 131
Ergo, A., 283
erythroplakia, 90
esophagus. See oral cancer
estrogen receptor protein, testing for, 11, 12b, 45
ethical considerations of cancer screening, 214–15
Ethiopia

326

Index

cervical cancer screening in, 74
domestic funding in, 282
opioid accessibility in, 168–69
European Guidelines for Quality Assurance in Colorectal
Cancer Screening and Diagnosis (IARC), 107,
108, 109
European Medicines Agency, 258
Europe/European Union. See also specific regions
and countries
alcohol consumption in, 157
cancer registries in, 266
cervical cancer in, 69
HPV vaccination in, 79
liver cancer in, 150
lung cancer in, 177
radiation therapy in, 244
smoking in, 180
F
Fakous Cancer Center (Egypt), 206b
false-positive screening tests, 213
farming practices. See aflatoxins
FCTC (Framework Convention on Tobacco Control),
10, 89, 188, 189
fee-for-service payments, 292
fentanyl patch, 168, 169, 170
Ferlay, J., 25
financing, 281–94. See also health insurance
cancer care and, 15, 282–83
co-payments, 291
country approaches, 283
domestic funding, 282
need for financial protection, 282
out-of-pocket spending by families, 282, 290
overview, 281–82
progressive universalism, 283
public financing, 282, 290–91
research support and, 256
surgery and, 235–36
Finland, ban on advertising of cigarettes in, 185
first-level hospitals
intervention packages, 9t
surgery in, 227, 228t
flukes. See liver fluke infection
Foley, K. M., 166
Fonseca, M., 60
Food and Drug Administration (U.S.), 258
food and grain storage. See aflatoxins
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control (FCTC),
10, 89, 188, 189
France
HCV treatment in, 156
liver cancer in, 149

oral cancer in, 85
smoking in
cigarette taxes, 10, 184
inverse relationship of consumption and price,
183, 183f
restrictions in public places, 185
Franceschi, Silvia, 147
Fred Hutchinson Cancer Research Center (Seattle,
Washington), 205b
Frenk, J., 214
G
Gakidou, E., 74
Gambia, liver cancer in, 149
Gardasil Access Program, 78
gastric cancer. See stomach cancer
Gauvreau, Cindy L., 1, 223, 263
Gavi (The Vaccine Alliance), 10, 16, 36, 78–80, 155, 299
Gelband, Hellen, 1, 147, 165, 268, 281
gender differences
cancer incidence and mortality by geographical
region, 29, 215
delay in screening for women, 214
liver cancer, 148m, 149
lung cancer, 29
most common cancers by gender, 30m, 215
oral cancer, 86t, 87–88m
smoking and associated cancer risks, 35–36, 176,
177f, 180
genetic factors
colorectal cancer, 105
high-risk screening and, 212
liver cancer, 149
oral cancer, 89–90
retinoblastoma, 137
Georgia, opioid accessibility in, 169
Germany
opioid accessibility in, 170
smoking restrictions in public places in, 185
Ghana
breast cancer screening in, 290
cervical cancer screening in, 217
Ghana-Norway partnership as part of Breast Health
Global Initiative, 199
HPV vaccination in, 78
liver cancer in, 149
universal health care in, 284, 286t, 289, 290
taxes to finance, 292
Ginsburg, Ophira M., 211
GlaxoSmithKline, 299
Global Adult Tobacco Survey, 180, 182, 184
Global Fund for AIDS, TB and Malaria, 16
Global Initiative for Cancer Registry Development, 39

globalization
comprehensive cancer centers, contribution to,
204–5
initiatives for cancer control, 16–17
tobacco use and, 189
Global Monitoring Framework for Noncommunicable
Diseases (WHO), 166
Global Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI), 168, 170–71
Global Task Force on Expanded Access to Cancer Care
and Control, 218–19
Global Task Force on Radiotherapy for Cancer
Control, 16
Global Youth Tobacco Survey, 182
Goldie, S. J., 80, 296
Gospodarowicz, Mary K., 195, 239
Greenberg, D., 111, 267
Gross, Thomas, 249
Guatemala
childhood cancer treatment in, 127b, 130, 197
Unidad Nacional de Oncología Pediátrica
(UNOP), 140
opioid accessibility in, 170
Guinea
cervical cancer in, 71
liver cancer in, 149
Guinea-Bissau, liver cancer in, 149
Gupta, Prakash C., 175
Gupta, Sumit, 121, 205
Guyana, cervical cancer in, 71
Gwatkin, D. R., 283
H
Haiti
domestic funding in, 282
HPV vaccination in, 78
Hall, Andrew, 147
Harif, Mhamed, 121
HBV. See hepatitis B and C viruses
HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma). See liver cancer
HCV. See hepatitis B and C viruses
HDI (Human Development Index), 31, 71, 81n2,
166, 226
HDV (hepatitis D virus), 149
head and neck cancers
imaging techniques for, 198
radiation therapy for, 240
health care professionals
research support role of, 250, 251b
screening by community care workers
and nurses, 218
shortage of skilled medical personnel, 232–33, 266
training of, 203–4
health communications, 255

Index

327

health insurance
as constraint, 266, 282
coverage by population group, 284, 289
fee-for-service basis, 292
incentives, 292
results of coverage, 291–92
Seguro Popular (Mexico), 1, 125, 204, 266, 283, 284,
287t, 291
services and conditions covered, 289–90
universal health coverage of cancer services, 4b, 234,
281, 283, 284, 289
Health Insurance Plan of Greater New York, 51
health surveillance systems. See surveillance systems
heart attack, smoking’s relationship to, 178, 185, 187
hepatitis B (HBV) and C (HCV) viruses, 154–56
antiviral therapy for, 155–56, 158, 159, 160
burden of cancer linked to, 36–37
liver cancer, 149–53
communication about, 255
incidence of HBV vs. HCV in, 151, 152f
prevention of HCV, 156b
screening for, 155–56
treatment of HBV, 155. See also hepatitis B
vaccination
cost-effectiveness of, 158
treatment of HCV, 155–56
cost-effectiveness of, 158–59
hepatitis B (HBV) vaccination, 4b, 154–55
burden of cancer and, 36
communication about, 255
cost-effectiveness of, 8, 13, 13f, 158, 267
costs of, 14t
global coverage, 10, 147
plasma-derived vaccine, 15
scaling up, 15, 149
hepatitis D virus (HDV), 149
hepatocellular carcinoma (HCC). See liver cancer
herpes virus type 8, 36
Herrero, Rolando, 69
high-income countries (HICs)
advanced cancer treatment in, 12
breast cancer in, 45, 48, 215
Burkitt lymphoma in, 135
cancer death rates in, 2–3m, 6t, 8f, 24, 27–28, 165
cancer survival rates in, 1
cervical cancer in, 70f
childhood cancer in, 11, 121
colorectal cancer in, 101, 108, 116
cost-effectiveness of cancer interventions in, 7b, 268
HCV infection in, 155
high-risk screening for breast or ovarian
cancer in, 212
liver cancer in, 150

328

Index

lung cancer in, 29
palliative care in, 11, 167, 169
percent of total health spending to cancer
control in, 15
prostate cancer in, 29
retinoblastoma in, 138
smoking in
advertising of cigarettes, ban on, 185
e-cigarettes, 186
health information and counter-advertising,
184–85
public places, restrictions on, 185
tobacco control, investment in, 189
tobacco excise taxes, 182–83
types of cancer prevalent in, 27
Hill, A., 156
HIV. See also antiretroviral therapy
cervical cancer and, 73
screening HIV-positive women for breast and
cervical cancer, 219
Hodgkin lymphoma, 129t, 131–33, 132t, 240
Honduras
cervical cancer in, 71
childhood leukemia in, 16, 122, 197
Hong Kong SAR
colorectal cancer in, 111
oral cancer in, 88
smoking risks in, 178–79
hormonal and reproductive factors, 38
Horton, Susan, 1, 101, 263, 281
Hospice Africa Uganda, 168, 170
hospice-palliative care, 167
hospitals. See also comprehensive cancer centers
intervention packages, 9t
research role of, 250
surgery in, by hospital level, 227, 228t
upgrading, 16
households, impact on, 7–8. See also catastrophic health
expenditures
Howard, Scott C., 121
HPV (human papillomavirus) infection
burden of cancer linked to, 36–37, 69, 71, 72, 282,
300–301
communication about, 255
DNA testing for, 233, 258, 266, 267
future research needs, 258–59, 258–59b
integrated research establishing link to cervical
cancer, 257–59
oral cancer and, 87, 88, 90, 218
screening for, 10, 75–77, 212
in China, 296–97
HPV (human papillomavirus) vaccination
case studies of implementation, 78

combined HPV vaccination and screening, 80–81, 217
communication about, 255
cost-effectiveness in China, 295–305
benefits and costs of publicly financed program,
299–301, 300t
cost assumption, 303
cost data sources, 299
delay in approving HPV vaccines, 303
extended cost-effectiveness analysis, 296–97
limitations of analysis, 303
model, 297, 298t
policy reform to expand present Expanded
Program for Immunization, 303
results, 299–300, 302t
sensitivity analysis, 299, 300–301t
strategies, data, and assumptions, 297–98
cost-effectiveness of, 13, 13f, 79–80, 217, 267
in China, 295–305. See also above: costeffectiveness in China
costs of, 14t, 282
in DCP3 Cancer essential package, 8
efficacy, 4b, 77
Gavi subsidy of, 36
national programs, 10, 69
public health challenges to implementing, 77
scaling up, 15, 217
universal health coverage of, 291
Human Development Index (HDI), 31, 71, 81n2,
166, 226
human immunodeficiency virus. See HIV
human rights, pain relief as, 165
Human Rights Watch, 168
human T-cell lymphotropic virus type 1, 36
Hungary, oral cancer in, 87, 88
Hunger, Stephen P., 121
I
IAHPC (International Association for Hospice and
Palliative Care), 167, 170
IARC. See International Agency for Research on Cancer
ICRCSN (International Colorectal Cancer Screening
Network), 108, 217
Ilbawi, Andre, 223
imaging. See diagnostic imaging
implementation science, 255–56
as “best buy” for cancer research, 259
INCB (International Narcotics Control Board), 168
incidence. See cancer incidence; specific types of cancer
income as proxy for human development, 26
India
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in, 128
breast cancer in, 45–47, 52, 226, 235
Mumbai trial, 216, 218

cancer death rates in, 7
cancer surgery costs in, 7
cervical cancer in, 71, 217, 258
childhood cancer in, 121, 122
chronic lung disease in, 178
costs of intervention packages in, 13, 282
guidelines adapted to local resource
availability in, 198
HBV infection rates in, 149
HBV vaccination in, 158
HCV treatment, cost-effectiveness of, 159
HPV testing and reduction in cervical cancer in, 258
liver cancer in, 149, 150
Million Death Study, 39
National Cancer Control Program, 203–4b
National Cancer Grid, 16, 231
opioid accessibility in, 168, 170
oral cancer in, 11, 85, 89, 92, 94, 95
percent of total health spending to cancer
control in, 15
radiation therapy in, 245
regional cancer centers in, 203–4b
retinoblastoma in, 137
smoking in, 178, 180
cigarette taxes, 10, 188
knowledge of health information, 184–85
related cancer deaths in, 178
surgery, private vs. public sector provision of
services in, 234
tuberculosis in, 178
universal health care in, 284, 286t, 289, 290, 292
cap on payments, 292
co-payments, 291
Indonesia
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in, 128
breast cancer detection in, 51
childhood cancer treatment in, 127b
smoking in, 180
male smoking prevalence, 30
WTO case on U.S. ban of clove-flavored
cigarettes, 189
types of cancer in, 29
inequality in health, contribution of cancer control to
reducing, 17
infections, cancers associated with, 36–37, 37f. See also
HPV (human papillomavirus) infection
information technology and management, 201, 218
informed consent to mammographic screening, 51
injected drug administration and HCV infection,
151, 155, 156b
Institute for Health Metrics and Evaluation, 250
International Agency for Research on Cancer (IARC)
on alcohol as liver carcinogen, 153

Index

329

on breast self-examination, 52
Cancer Incidence in Five Continents, 25, 57, 266
on cervical cancer screening, 73
on clinical breast examination, 51
on colorectal cancer screening, 107, 108–9
estimating cancer incidence and death rate, 6
global initiative for cancer registry, 40, 40m
GLOBOCAN, 7b, 25, 27, 81n1, 297
International Incidence of Childhood Cancer, 123
on liver flukes, 154
on lung cancer in men in HICs, 177
on mammogram screenings, 50
Monographs on the Evaluation of Carcinogenic
Risks to Humans, 12
national cancer mortality databank of, 26
radiation facilities provided to Sub-Saharan
Africa by, 266
Working Group on Cervical Cancer Screening, 73
International Association for Hospice and Palliative
Care (IAHPC), 167, 170
International Association of Cancer Registries, 25
International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA), 199, 244
Programme of Action for Cancer Therapy, 245, 267
International Cancer Screening Network, 109, 267
International Childhood Cancer Cohort
Consortium, 254
International Classification of Diseases, 25, 26
International Colorectal Cancer Screening Network
(ICRCSN), 108, 217
International Digestive Cancer Alliance, 109
International Federation of Gynecology and
Obstetrics, 78
International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), 168
International Network for Cancer Treatment and
Research, 206b
International Observatory of End of Life Care, 167
international partnerships. See also twinning programs
colorectal cancer and, 111
effectiveness of, 266–67
research support, 257
International Society of Oncology Pharmacy
Practitioners, 201
International Society of Pediatric Oncology
(SIOP), 125
Abandonment of Treatment Working Group, 127
International Society of Radiology, 199
interventions. See also specific types of cancer
cost-effectiveness of, 4b, 7b, 13, 13f
diagnosis and treatment, 11
essential packages of, 8–13, 9t
implementation challenges for, 15–16
local priority conditions, 11–13
palliative care. See pain relief

330

Index

prevention. See prevention strategies
resource requirements, 14, 14t
screening. See cancer screening
surgery. See surgery
intestinal cancer. See stomach cancer
intravenous drug users, HCV infection in, 151,
155, 156b
Iran, opioid accessibility in, 170
Iraq, radiation therapy in, 265
Ireland
radiation therapy in, 245
smoking restrictions in public places in, 185
Israel, liver cancer in, 150
Israels, Trijn, 121
Italy
HCV infection in, 151
incidence of HBV vs. HCV in, 151, 152f
J
Jaffray, David A., 239
Jamaica
cervical cancer in, 71
opioid accessibility in, 169
Jamison, Dean T., 295
Japan
cancer death rates in, 24
quitting smoking’s effect on, 178
smoking’s effect on, 175–76, 177f
colorectal cancer screening in, 108
HCV infection in, 151
incidence of HBV vs. HCV in, 151, 152f
liver cancer in, 149
lung cancer in, 177
mammography in, 63
oral cancer in, 88
stomach cancer in, 218
Japan Life Span Study, 254
Jha, Prabhat, 1, 175
Johnson, Newell, 85
Jordan
childhood leukemia in, 122
King Hussein Cancer Foundation, 196,
196–97b
opioid accessibility in, 168
K
Kalager, M., 215
Kaposi sarcoma, 29
Kenya
HPV vaccination in, 78
opioid accessibility in, 168–69
radiation therapy in, 245
Khader, Jamal, 195

Kim, Jane J., 69, 295
King Hussein Cancer Foundation (Jordan), 196,
196–97b
Knaul, Felicia, 195, 214, 281, 284
Korea, Republic of
breast cancer treatment in, 60
colorectal cancer in, 108, 111
fee-for-service payments in, 292
liver cancer in, 149
liver fluke infection in, 154
mammograms in, 60
oral cancer in, 88
stomach cancer in, 218
thyroid cancer in women in, 29
L
laboratories. See also pathology
in comprehensive cancer centers, 199
constraints, 265
research role of, 252
Ladner, J., 78
Lambert, R., 114, 217
Lan, N. H., 235
Lancet Commission on Investing in Health, 284
Lao People’s Democratic Republic
HPV vaccination in, 78
liver cancer in, 149
liver fluke infection in, 154
larynx. See oral cancer
Latin America and the Caribbean. See also specific
countries
aflatoxins in, 157
alcohol consumption in, 157
cervical cancer in, 71, 71m
health care coverage, variations in, 284, 289
liver cancer in, 149, 150
Network of National Cancer Institutions of Latin
America (RINC) initiative, 245
oral cancer in, 85
radiation therapy in, 244
types of cancer in, 29
lead-time bias, 212
Lee, S., 60
length bias, 213
Lesotho, HPV vaccination in, 78
leukemia
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL), 11, 127,
128–31
characteristics of, 129t
chemotherapy, 129–30
costs of treatment, 130–31, 290
diagnosis of, 129
in HICs, 128–29

in LMICs, 129–30
treatment of, 129–30
acute myeloid leukemia, 197
acute promyelocytic leukemia (APL), 126b
incidence and death rates, 6t, 28f
childhood, 121–23, 122f
radiation therapy for, 240
leukoplakia, 90
Levin, Carol, 69, 249, 295
Libya, cervical cancer in, 71
lifestyle
breast cancer and, 45, 47
cancer and, 23–24, 29, 32, 38
colorectal cancer and, 105, 114, 217
Lipscomb, Joseph, 45
liver cancer, 147–64
aflatoxins and, 11, 150, 151, 153, 156–57, 159
alcohol consumption and, 153–54, 157
cost-effectiveness of interventions, 13, 13f, 158–60,
268, 273–74t
costs of treating, 159–60
global burden of, 147–50
HCC (hepatocellular carcinoma) as most
common type, 147
incidence and death rates, 6t, 8f, 27–29, 28f,
147–49, 148m
age-specific incidence, 149
by gender, 148m, 149, 215
by income groups, 149–50, 150f
trends, 150
liver fluke infection, 11–12, 149, 154, 157–58, 277
obesity and, 147, 154
prognosis and DALYs, 150, 158
research support for, 259–60
risk factors, 150–54, 160t. See also hepatitis
B and C viruses
treatment of, 9t, 158, 160, 160t. See also hepatitis
B vaccination
vaccination programs for, 32, 154–56. See also
hepatitis B vaccination
London, W. Thomas, 147
low- and middle-income countries (LMICs)
air pollution in, 38
alcohol consumption in, 157. See also alcohol
consumption
breast cancer in, 45, 215–16. See also breast cancer
compared to HICs, 216
cost-effective interventions, 59–61
early-stage treatment, 12b
incidence and death rates, 27, 59
Burkitt lymphoma in, 134. See also Burkitt
lymphoma
cancer incidence and death rates in, 2–3m, 4b,

Index

331

6t, 8f, 17, 27, 165, 166. See also specific
types of cancer
cancer screening priorities in, 218. See also cancer
screening
cancer statistics, need to compile and monitor in, 24,
26, 39
cancer survival rates in, 1
cancer transition in, 29–32
cervical cancer in, 69, 70f. See also cervical cancer
regional burden, 71, 71m
screening programs, 75, 216–17
treatment, 78
childhood cancer in, 123. See also childhood cancer
colorectal cancer in, 108. See also colorectal cancer
international partnership arrangements to
support treatment, 111
screening programs, 217
comprehensive cancer centers in, 196. See also
comprehensive cancer centers
cost-effectiveness of interventions in, 13, 13f,
267–69, 270, 275, 276–77t, 277. See also
cost-effectiveness
costs of cancer control in, 4b, 14t. See also costs
delayed presentation for cancer as norm in, 213–14,
234, 282, 290
economic overview, 263–64. See also
cost-effectiveness
financing cancer care in, 15, 281
HPV vaccination programs in, 10, 77. See also HPV
vaccination
inadequate resources in, 264
intervention packages in, 9–10
laboratories in, 265
liver cancer in, 150. See also liver cancer
lung cancer in, 177. See also lung cancer
noncommunicable diseases, death rates in, 24, 24f
oral cancer in, 85, 89. See also oral cancer
cost-effectiveness assessments of preventing and
screening, 94–96
future research needs, 96
pain control in, 166–71. See also pain relief
radiation therapy in, 239, 265. See also radiation
therapy
retinoblastoma in, 137
surgery in, 223, 229–30t, 233–34b, 264–65.
See also surgery
tobacco use in, 23, 35–36. See also tobacco use
affordability and, 182
smoking cessation patterns, 180
Westernized lifestyle adopted in, 24, 29, 217
low-income countries (LICs). See low- and middleincome countries (LMICs)
lung cancer

332

Index

air pollution and, 38
asbestos exposure and, 38
burden of, 29–30
gender differences, 29, 177–78, 215
by geographical region, 29, 177
incidence and death rates, 8f, 27–29, 28f, 215
by income group, 29
radiation therapy for, 240
Luo, X. Q., 131
Luxembourg, cervical cancer screening in, 74
lymphoma. See also Burkitt lymphoma; Hodgkin
lymphoma
incidence and death rates, 28f
radiation therapy for, 240
M
MacLennan, Mary, 175
Madagascar
cervical cancer screening in, 75
HPV vaccination in, 78
Malawi
Burkitt lymphoma in, 137
cervical cancer in, 71, 75
childhood cancer in, 139
HPV vaccination in, 78
nonphysicians performing surgery in, 232
Malaysia
cervical cancer prevention approaches in, 80
liver fluke infection in, 154
referral hospital in, 61
mammograms, 10–11, 29, 45, 49–51, 51t, 57–58, 63,
212, 214, 215–16, 277, 290
mastectomy, 54, 55t
mate drinking, as risk factor for oral cancer, 90
maternal health policy as umbrella for breast and
cervical cancer, 219
Mauritius, inverse relationship of consumption and
price of smoking in, 183
McGlynn, Katherine A., 147
MD Anderson Cancer Center at the University
of Texas, 111
medical records, 250
medications. See drug therapy
men, cancer incidence and mortality of. See gender
differences
Merck, 78, 299
methodology, 7b
Metzger, Monika L., 121
Mexico
breast cancer, national health insurance coverage of,
1, 291
cancer services guidelines in, 198
catastrophic health expenditures in, 290

cervical cancer in, 80, 266
childhood cancer in, 1, 125, 204
liver cancer in, 149
Oportunidades program in, 284
percent of total health spending to cancer control
in, 15
Seguro Popular (national public insurance
program), 1, 125, 204, 266, 283, 284, 287t, 291
smoking in
cigarette taxes in, 10
inverse relationship of consumption and price, 183
knowledge of health information, 184
survival rates due to improved coverage in, 291
universal health care in, 284
m-Health models, 218
Middle East and North Africa. See also specific countries
bladder cancer in, 12
cervical cancer in, 71
colorectal cancer in, 111
HPV vaccination in, 79
types of cancer in, 29
middle-income countries (MICs). See low- and
middle-income countries (LMICs)
Million Death Study (India), 39
ministries’ research role, 249–50, 251b
mobile phones, use of, 218
Moldova, pain medications in, 167
Mongolia
HBV vaccination program in, 149
HCV infection in, 151, 155
liver cancer in, 29, 149
opioid accessibility in, 169
morphine, 166, 168, 170, 265t
mortality rates. See cancer death rates
Muñoz, N., 257
Murillo, Raul H., 45
Muslim countries
alcohol consumption levels in, 37
breast cancer screening in, 58
Myanmar, cervical cancer screening in, 74
N
NAFD (non-alcoholic fatty liver disease), 147, 154
Namibia, childhood cancer in, 121
National Cancer Institute (U.S.), 215, 255
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Program (U.S.), 251–52
National Comprehensive Cancer Network, 111, 198
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence (UK),
267
National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and Alcoholism
(NIAAA), 153–54
national strategies

cancer research, commitments to, 249–62. See also
research support
cancer services, universal health coverage of, 4b, 234
collaboration, 256
effectiveness of, 267
intervention packages, 9t
MIC national programs, 234
Native Americans, retinoblastoma among, 137
NCDs. See noncommunicable diseases
neck cancer. See head and neck cancers
needle biopsies, 54, 63
Nepal
B. P. Koirala Memorial Cancer Hospital, 206b
cervical cancer in, 71
HPV vaccination in, 78
opioid accessibility in, 169, 170
pain medications in, 167
Netherlands, smoking restrictions in public
places in, 185
Network of National Cancer Institutions of Latin
America (RINC) initiative, 245
newborns, HPB vaccination for. See hepatitis B
vaccination
New Zealand. See Australia/New Zealand
NGOs. See nongovernmental organizations
NIAAA (National Institute of Alcohol Abuse and
Alcoholism), 153–54
Nicaragua, cervical cancer in, 71
Niger
domestic funding in, 282
HPV vaccination in, 78
Nigeria
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in, 128
aflatoxins in, 159
breast cancer in, 226
cervical cancer screening in, 75
costs of intervention packages in, 13
non-alcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFD), 147, 154
noncommunicable diseases (NCDs)
allocation of development assistance for, 16
cancer in comparison to other causes of
death, 24, 24f
surveillance systems for, 250–51, 252t
tobacco as major contributor to, 187
nongovernmental organizations (NGOs)
cancer prevention activities and funding of,
139, 290
research role of, 250, 256
surgical capacity support from, 234b
Nordhagen, S., 74
Nordic countries. See also specific countries
cervical cancer screening in, 73
liver cancer in, 149, 150

Index

333

oral cancer in, 88
taxation to finance universal health coverage
in, 284
Northern Africa. See Middle East and North Africa
Northern Ireland’s greenways urbanization project,
effect on chronic diseases, 38
North-South collaborations, 16, 257
Norway
advertising of cigarettes, ban on, 185
Ghana-Norway partnership as part of Breast
Health Global Initiative, 199
opioid accessibility in, 170
Nurses’ Health Study, 254, 254b
nut chewing, as oral cancer risk, 85, 87, 88–89
nutrition as risk factor for oral cancer, 89
O
Obermeyer, Z., 74
obesity. See also lifestyle
relationship to cancer, 37–38
liver cancer, 147, 154
occult blood test. See colorectal cancer (CRC)
occupational risk factors, 38
Olson, Zachary, 295
Omar, Sherif, 195
opioid accessibility in, 168
opioid medications, 11, 165–69, 167f. See also pain relief
Opioid Price Watch (IAHPC), 167, 170
Opisthorchis viverrini, 36
Oportunidades program (Mexico), 284
oral cancer, 85–99
alcohol consumption associated with, 37, 89
chemotherapy, 94, 275
chronic trauma as risk factor, 90
cost-effectiveness assessments of interventions,
94–96
cost-effectiveness of interventions, 94–96, 95t, 268,
274–75t
defined, 85
early diagnosis and staging of, 92, 93t
future research needs, 96
genetic factors, 89–90
high-risk screening, 212
HPV infection and, 87, 88, 90, 218
incidence and death rates, 6t, 28f, 85–88
by gender, 86t, 87–88m, 215
by income group, 87f, 224f
intervention packages, 9t
management of, 92
natural history of, 90
nutrition as risk factor, 89
oral potentially malignant disorders (OPMDs),
screening for, 91

334

Index

overview, 85
posttreatment follow-up, 94
prognosis, 94
radiation therapy for, 92–94, 240
research support for, 260
risk factors, 85–90, 218
screening for, 11, 90, 91–92, 218
health care personnel performing visual
screening, 91
high-risk screening, 212
self-examination, 91–92
visual screening, 90–91, 277
surgery, 92–94, 228, 229–30t
complications of, 94
survival rates, 88
treatment of, 92–94
viruses as risk factor, 90
oral submucous fibrosis (OSMF), 89, 90
Organisation for Economic Co-operation and
Development’s Global Science Forum, 257
ovarian cancer
death rates from, 6t
high-risk screening, 58, 212
overdiagnosis concerns, 213, 215
oxycodone, 168, 170
P
PAF (population attributable fraction), 26–27
pain relief, 165–73
availability of broadly defined palliative care
services, 167
barriers in LMICs to, 167–69
cancer patients’ need for, 166
comprehensive cancer center services, 200
cost-effectiveness of, 9, 169
costs of, 14t, 169–70
Global Opioid Policy Initiative (GOPI), 168,
170–71
as human right, 165
International Narcotics Control Board (INCB), 168
in LMICs, 166–67
opioid medications, availability of, 11, 166–67, 167f
Opioid Price Watch (IAHPC), 167, 170
overzealous regulation restricting access to, 168
patient perspective, 170
Pakistan
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in, 128
HCV infection in, 151
incidence of HBV vs. HCV in, 151, 152f
oral cancer in, 87, 88, 94
Palestinian Authority, breast cancer screening in, 58
Palipudi, Krishna, 175
palliative care. See also pain relief

radiation therapy and, 165, 240, 241
surgery with palliative intent, 230
pancreas cancer, 28f
Pap smears, 69, 73, 74, 216
Papua New Guinea, oral cancer in, 85
Partners in Health, 199
pathology
comprehensive cancer center services, 199
research role of, 252
surgery’s reliance on, 226
telepathology, 218
PBCRs (population-based cancer registries), 25,
39, 251
pediatric cancer. See childhood cancer
Pediatric Oncology in Developing Countries (PODC)
committee of International Society of Pediatric
Oncology (SIOP), 125
Peru
cervical cancer prevention approaches in, 80
universal health care in, 284, 287t, 289, 290
Peto, Richard, 179
pharmacotherapy. See chemotherapy
pharmacy services. See also drug therapy
comprehensive cancer centers, 201
pharynx. See oral cancer
Philip Morris, 189
Philippines
colorectal cancer incidence rates in, 103
opioid accessibility in, 170
smoking in
implementation of excise tax increases, 184
implications of tobacco taxation, 10, 188
inverse relationship of consumption and
price, 183
physical inactivity. See lifestyle
“Pink Ribbon Red Ribbon” program, 219
Poland
opioid accessibility in, 170
radiation therapy in, 245
smoking in
cessation treatments, 186
implementation of excise tax increases, 184
inverse relationship of consumption and
price, 183
popularity paradox, 215
population attributable fraction (PAF), 26–27
population-based cancer registries (PBCRs), 25, 39, 251
population-based randomized trial, 62
Pramesh, C. S., 223
prevention strategies, 1, 10. See also specific types
of cancer
primary health clinic or mobile outreach, 9t
priorities for international support, 16–17

cost reduction for essential intervention
packages, 16
research support, 17
technical assistance, 16–17
progressive universalism, 283
prostate cancer
early detection as factor, 29
by geographical region, 29
incidence and death rates, 6t, 27, 28f
by income group, 32f
transitions in low- and middle-income
countries, 29
overdiagnosis concerns, 213
physical inactivity, relationship to, 38
radiation therapy for, 240
research support for, 260
screening for, 10
lead-time bias and, 212
prostate-specific antigen (PSA) testing, 10–11
psychosocial support, 200
public awareness of cancer control interventions,
16, 255
public places, restrictions on smoking in, 185, 188
Q
Qiao, You-Lin, 249, 295
quality-adjusted life years (QALYs), 7b
R
Rabeneck, Linda, 101, 268
Radiation Safety Institute of Canada, 199
radiation therapy (RT), 239–47. See also specific types
of cancer
access to, 243–45, 244m
as adjuvant treatment, 231, 240
adoption of expert systems and machine learning
methods, 243
brachytherapy, 241
comprehensive cancer center services, 199–200, 243
concurrent chemotherapy and, 240
constraints on, 265
cost-effectiveness of, 239
critical normal structures, limited tolerance of, 240
delivery methods, 241–43
equipment specialized for, 239, 265
externally applied radiation beams, 241
facilities designed for, 241–42
infrastructure requirements, 244, 265
integration into cancer centers, 243
intensity modulated radiation therapy (IMRT), 240
in multidisciplinary approach to cancer
management, 239
oral cancer, 94

Index

335

overview, 239–40
palliative treatment and, 165, 240, 241
personnel and radiation therapists, 242, 244
process, 242
radioisotope therapy, 241
safety and quality assurance, 242–43
scaling up, 15, 275
as sole therapy, 240
stereotactic RT, 240
uses of, 240–41
Rajaraman, Preetha, 249
Ramadas, Kunnambath, 85
Ramasundarahettige, Chintanie, 175
raw fish consumption, 157
Reach for Recovery, 58
Rebbeck, Timothy, 249
rectal cancer, 110. See also colorectal cancer
referrals, 214
surgery, 231–32
regional cancer centers, establishment of, 203, 203–4b
registries
childhood cancer incidence rates in, 121, 122f
death registration systems, linking to cancer
registration systems, 253
global initiative for cancer registry through IARC,
40, 40m
importance of, 266
population-based cancer registries (PBCRs), 25,
39, 251
types of data in, 250–52
reproductive health policy as umbrella for breast
and cervical cancer, 219
Republic of Korea. See Korea, Republic of
research support, 17, 249–62
“best buys,” 259–60
biobanking, 252–53
budget allocation recommended for, 249
Call to Action for Research on Health (2008
Bamako Forum), 249, 250b
cancer registries, data in, 250–52
case-control studies, 253
cervical cancer as integrated research exemplar,
257–59
cohort studies, 254, 254–55b
collaboration, 256
education to include, 256
epidemiologic studies, 253–57, 260
health care professionals’ role in, 250
health communications, 255
health surveillance and cancer surveillance, 250–51
hospitals’ role in, 250
implementation science, 255–56, 256b
as “best buy” for cancer research, 259

336

Index

industry collaboration, 257
international collaboration, 257
laboratories and anatomic pathology, 252
linking death registration systems to cancer
registration systems, 253
local level collaboration, 256
ministries’ role in, 249–50
national level collaboration, 256
overview, 249
priorities in cancer research, 250–57
research training, 256–57
stakeholders’ knowledge needs and, 249–50, 251b
transport of specimens among countries, 253, 256
resource limitations
availability across countries, 264–67
comprehensive cancer centers, 202–5
need for guidelines to address, 48–49
surgery, 226–27, 227b
retinoblastoma, 137–38
Rodriguez-Galindo, Carlos, 121
Romania, opioid accessibility in, 169, 170
Russia
alcohol consumption levels in, 37
breast cancer detection in, 52
colon cancer incidence and mortality in, 266
HCV treatment in, 156
health insurance coverage in, 266
liver cancer, cost of treatment in, 159
liver fluke infection in, 154
oral cancer in, 88
smoking in, 180
knowledge of health information, 184
price elasticity, 181
Rwanda
cervical screening and treatment services in, 228
HPV vaccination program in, 78
opioid accessibility in, 169
Rwandan Women’s Interassociation Study and
Assessment, 73
S
St. Jude Children’s Research Hospital (Memphis,
Tennessee), 130, 136, 204, 205b
Sankaranarayanan, Rengaswamy, 1, 85, 114, 217, 258, 268
Sauvaget, C., 114, 217
Sayginsoy, O., 187
scaling up
cancer screening projects, 214
chemotherapy, 16, 275
childhood cancer, 277
hepatitis B vaccination, 15
HPV vaccination, 15
surgical systems, 234–35

Schistosoma haematobium, 36
schistosomiasis, 12
screening. See cancer screening; specific types of cancer
secondhand smoke, 175
SEER (Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results)
Program, 102
Seguro Popular (Mexico), 1, 125, 204, 266, 283, 284,
287t, 291
self-examination
breast self-examination, 52, 216
oral cancer screening, 91–92
Sharma, Monisha, 295
Shi, Ju-Fang, 295
Shulman, L., 214
Sierra Leone, HPV vaccination in, 78
simeprevir, 155–56, 159
Singapore
colorectal cancer in, 108, 111
head and neck cancers, imaging techniques for, 198
health insurance coverage in, 289
liver fluke infection in, 154
oral cancer in, 88
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs of 1961, 168
SIOP (International Society of Pediatric
Oncology), 125
skilled medical personnel, 266
skin cancer, 38, 240, 260
Slovak Republic, oral cancer in, 87, 88
smoking. See tobacco use
smuggling and black market sales of cigarettes, 186–87
sociocultural beliefs. See cultural practices
Soerjomataram, Isabelle, 23
sofosbuvir, 155–56, 159
South Africa
breast cancer and access to treatment in, 225
cervical cancer prevention approaches in, 80, 217
national health insurance package in, 15
smoking in
cigarette taxes, 10, 184
inverse relationship of consumption and price,
183, 183f
reporting on death certificates, 185
smuggling and black market sales of cigarettes, 187
South Asia
catastrophic health expenditures in, 282
colorectal cancer in, 38, 102
HBV infection in, 151
HCV infection in, 155
head and neck cancers in, 198
high-risk screening for oral cancer in, 212
imaging techniques guidelines for head and neck
cancers, 198
liver cancer in, 147

oral cancer in, 85, 87, 89, 212, 218
tobacco use in, 175
Southeast Asia
aflatoxins in, 153
alcohol consumption in, 157
breast cancer in, 60
colorectal cancer in, 38, 114
oral cancer screening in, 87, 218
high-risk screening, 212
South-South collaborations, 16, 257
Spain
liver cancer in, 149
opioid accessibility in, 170
smuggling and black market sales of cigarettes
in, 187
specialized cancer centers/units. See also comprehensive
cancer centers
childhood cancer dedicated centers, 123–24,
124t, 128
intervention packages, 9t
scaling up, 16
Standards of Oncology Pharmacy Practice, 201
Stevens, Lisa, 249
stomach cancer
diet and consumption associated with, 37
incidence and death rates, 6t, 8f, 27, 28f, 215, 218
decline in, 29
by income group, 35f
research support for, 260
schistosomiasis and, 12
screening for, 218
stroke, smoking’s relationship to, 178, 184
Subramanian, Sujha, 85
Sub-Saharan Africa
alcohol consumption in, 157
antiretroviral therapy in, 73
Burkitt lymphoma in, 123, 134
cancer incidence and death rates in, 166
cancer trends in, 29
cervical cancer in, 23, 71, 71m
childhood cancer in, 121
costs of intervention packages in, 13–14
HBV infection in, 151
HCV infection in, 155
HPV vaccination in, 10, 79
liver cancer in, 147, 149, 151
national health insurance coverage in, 290
radiation therapy in, 244, 265, 266
resource constraints in, 264
retinoblastoma in, 137
surgical infrastructure needed in, 223
Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services
Administration, 255–56

Index

337

Sudan
cervical cancer in, 71
opioid accessibility in, 170
oral cancer, smokeless tobacco products as
factor in, 89
pain medications in, 167
Sullivan, Richard, 211, 223
Sullivan, Terrence, 211
surgery, 223–38
access to, 225, 225t
adjuvant treatment considerations, 230–31, 240
anesthesia, safe provision of, 226
biopsy procedures, 227–28
breast cancer, 12b, 54, 55–56t, 223
burden of surgically treatable cancers in LMICs, 224,
224f, 236
capacity building, 232–35
centralized vs. decentralized delivery models,
231, 231t
cervical cancer, 78
colon cancer, 110, 223
comprehensive cancer center services, 199
costs and cost-effectiveness of, 235–36, 267
diagnostic role of, 227
distribution of services, 225
guidelines for surgical platforms, 227–31
imaging in conjunction with, 226
infrastructure and training, 225–26, 232–33, 264–65
need for further study to assess effectiveness of, 235,
236, 267
nonphysician providers, task shifting to, 232
oral cancer, 92–94
complications of, 94
overview, 223
pain relief and, 165
pathology in conjunction with, 226
platforms for delivery, 227–31, 228–30t
private vs. public sector provision of services, 234
procurement processes, 233
quality and safety, 225–26, 233, 233–34b
rectal cancer, 110
referral networks, service coordination, and
partnerships, 231–32
resources
availability across countries, 264–65, 265t
stratified approaches by level of care, 226–27,
227b
scaling up, 15, 16, 234–35
shortage of surgeons in LMICs, 232–33
standardization of guidelines, 225
status in LMICs, 224–25
surgical missions, 232
treatment with curative intent, 228–30

338

Index

treatment with palliative intent, 230
utilization of services, 225
workforce development for, 232–33
Surveillance, Epidemiology, and End Results (SEER)
Program, 102
surveillance systems, 250–51, 252t
as “best buy” for cancer research, 259
need for, 24, 26, 39–40
survivorship programs, 200
Sweden
alcohol consumption levels in, 37
cervical cancer treatment in, 16
Switzerland, smoking in
knowledge of health risks associated with, 185
possible tax increase on cigarettes, 184
treaty with Uruguay as basis for lawsuit, 189
T
Taiwan
colorectal cancer in, 108, 111
HCV infection in, 151
hepatitis B vaccination in, 36
incidence of HBV vs. HCV in, 151, 152f
liver cancer in, 149, 159
oral cancer in, 85, 87, 92
tamoxifen, 12b, 54, 60, 231, 265t
Tanzania
cervical cancer screening in, 75
HPV vaccination in, 78
technical assistance, need to prioritize, 16–17
telemedicine, 218
telepathology, 218
Thailand
care availability, outcomes of increasing, 291
cervical cancer prevention approaches in, 80–81, 292
colorectal cancer in, 103, 108, 217
financing of cancer interventions from taxes in, 290
liver cancer in, 149
liver fluke infection in, 149, 154, 158
oral cancer in, 88, 94
smoking in
implications of tobacco taxation, 188
inverse relationship of consumption
and price, 183
knowledge of health information, 185
universal health care in, 284, 288t, 289, 290
co-payments, 291
Thomas, David B., 45
Three-Step Analgesic Ladder (WHO), 166
Thun, M. J., 254
thyroid cancer
by geographical region, 29
incidence and death rates, 28f

tissue sampling, 54, 63, 227–28
tobacco taxes, 180–84
ad valorem taxes, 182
affordability and, 182
cost-effectiveness of, 13, 13f, 187
discouraging youth smoking, 10, 182
financing of cancer interventions from, 15, 290
implementation of large tax increases, 183–84, 183f
poverty considerations, 188
price elasticity of demand for tobacco, 181–82
signaling effects of price increases, 184
smart excise tax structure, 182–83, 184f
tobacco use, 175–93. See also oral cancer; tobacco taxes
advertising of cigarettes, 185, 189
cancer and other diseases resulting from, 176–78
chronic lung disease and, 178
colorectal cancer and, 32
cost-effectiveness of tobacco control, 187–88,
187–88t
current global volume of, 180
e-cigarettes, 186
epidemiology of smoking-attributable diseases,
175–79
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
(FCTC), 10, 89, 188, 189
future burden of cancer and, 32, 34–36, 179
gender differences in, 29–30, 176, 177f, 180
Global Adult Tobacco Survey, 182, 184
globalization and, 189
Global Youth Tobacco Survey, 182
individuals who start smoking in adolescence or
early adult life, 176, 176t, 177f, 181t
international initiatives, 189
intervention packages, 9t
cost-effectiveness of, 8
costs of, 14t
effectiveness of, 10, 182t
mortality rates, 35, 175, 179
avoidable deaths before 2050, 189
cessation of use, effect on, 178
in LMICs, 178–79
smoking’s delayed effect on, 175–76
plain packaging mandate, 185, 189
population attributable fraction (PAF) and, 26
poverty considerations for, 188
public places, restrictions on smoking in, 185, 188
as risk factor, 23, 85, 87, 88–89
smokeless tobacco use, 88–89
smoking cessation
counseling and cessation support
programs, 186
health information and counter-advertising,
184–85

interventions to increase, 180–87. See also
tobacco taxes
patterns, 180
smuggling and black market sales of cigarettes,
186–87
supply-side interventions, 186–87
tuberculosis and, 178
Uruguay case study of tobacco control, 188–89
U.S. ban of clove-flavored cigarettes, WTO suit
over, 189
WTO suits involving cigarettes, 189
traditional medicine, 155
training of health care professionals, 203–4
in radiation therapy, 244
surgeons and surgical staff, 225–26, 232–33
transport of specimens among countries, 253, 256
trastuzumab, 12b, 290
Trimble, Edward L., 249
Trypuc, Joann, 195
tuberculosis, 176, 178
Tufts Medical Center Cost-Effectiveness Analysis
Registry of cancer-related studies, 235
tumor lysis syndrome (TLS), 135
Tunisia, cervical cancer in, 71
Turkey
financing approach in, 283
radiation therapy in, 245
smoking, inverse relationship of consumption
and price in, 183
twinning programs
childhood cancer treatment, 124–25, 130, 140
development of cancer centers and, 205
examples of, 205–6b, 267
innovative approaches and, 218
pathology and laboratory medicine, 199
survival rates improved by, 205
U
Uganda
alcohol consumption levels in, 37
cancer trends in, 29
cervical cancer in, 23, 75
opioid accessibility in, 169
Uganda Cancer Institute, 205b
ultrasound in breast cancer diagnosis, 54, 216
Unidad Nacional de Oncología Pediátrica (UNOP,
Guatemala), 140
Union for International Cancer Control (UICC), 197b
Global Task Force on Radiotherapy for Cancer
Control, 245
Tumor, Nodes, Metastasis (TNM) staging system, 92
United Kingdom
asbestos exposure and lung cancer in, 38

Index

339

breast cancer, new drug treatments for, 13
British doctors, cohort study of, 254
British Royal College of Physicians, 185
HCV treatment in, 156
National Institute for Health and Care Excellence, 267
opioid accessibility in, 170
oral cancer in, 88
quitting smoking’s effect on mortality in, 178
salt intake, related to cancer rate in, 37
smoking in
effect on mortality in, 175–76, 177f
inverse relationship of consumption and price,
183, 183f
quitting, effect on cancer, 178, 180
taxation to finance universal health coverage
in, 284
United Kingdom Million Women Study, 254
United Nations (UN)
demographic estimates of cancer mortality, 7b
Sustainable Development Goals for 2030, 1
United Nations Population Fund, 219
United Nations World Population Prospects, 26
United States
acute lymphoblastic leukemia (ALL) in, 128
alcohol consumption in, 157
cancer registries in, 266
colorectal cancer incidence rates in, 102
cost-effectiveness in, 267
incidence of HBV vs. HCV in, 151, 152f
liver cancer in, 149, 150
liver cirrhosis in, 154
lung cancer in, 177
asbestos exposure and, 38
opioids for pain relief in, 169
oral cancer, smokeless tobacco products as factor
for, 89
smoking in, 180
advertising of cigarettes, 185
ban of clove-flavored cigarettes, WTO suit over,
181–82
e-cigarettes, 186
effect on mortality in, 176, 177f
implementation of excise tax increases, 184, 187
inverse relationship of consumption and price,
183, 183f
price elasticity, 181–82
quitting, effect on mortality, 178, 179f
U.S. Surgeon General’s Report, 185
youth quitting, 184
surgery in, 236
universal health coverage. See health insurance
urbanization, 263, 277
Uruguay

340

Index

colorectal cancer in, 11
oral cancer in, 85
tobacco control in, 188–89
U.S. Community Preventive Services Task Force, 157
U.S. Multi-Society Task Force on CRC/American
Cancer Society (USMSTF), 107, 108
U.S. Preventive Services Task Force (USPSTF), 10–11
on breast self-examination, 52
on clinical breast examination, 51
on colorectal screenings, 107–8
on mammogram screenings, 50, 51t
on oral cancer, 91, 218
on screening guidelines, 198
U.S. Surgeon General’s Report, 185
V
vaccines. See hepatitis B (HBV) vaccination; HPV
(human papillomavirus) vaccination
Verguet, Stéphane, 295
Victoria Hospice (Victoria, British Columbia), 206b
Vietnam
breast cancer in
clinical breast examinations, 60
surgical treatment costs, 235
liver cancer in, 149
liver fluke infection in, 154
opioid accessibility in, 168–69
smoking in
affordability, 182
implications of tobacco taxation, 188
knowledge of health information, 184
Vos, T., 267
W
Wagner, Judith, 165
Wang, Shao-Ming, 295
Wee, J. T., 198
Welch, Gilbert, 215
West Africa, aflatoxins in, 157
WHO. See World Health Organization
Wild, Christopher P., 147
Wilms tumor, 11, 126, 133–34, 133t, 135t
Wilson-Junger screening criteria, 213, 213b
women. See also gender differences
breast cancer. See breast cancer
cervical cancer. See cervical cancer
ovarian cancer. See ovarian cancer
World Development Report (1993), 5b
World Economic Forum/Harvard School of Public
Health, 218
World Endoscopy Organization, 109
World Endoscopy Society, 267
World Health Assembly

premature death, goal to reduce, 1
smoking, goal to reduce, 189
World Health Organization (WHO). See also
International Agency for Research on Cancer
(IARC)
on breast cancer guidelines, 48
cervical cancer screening, VIA demonstration
project, 75
Choosing Interventions That Are Cost-Effective
(WHO-CHOICE) framework, 59, 60, 277
on cigarette excise taxes, 183–84
collection of cancer incidence, 39
on cost-effective intervention strategies for NCDs in
LMICs, 218
cost effectiveness recommendations, 60, 138, 235
on effectiveness of tobacco control, HPV and HBV
vaccination, and opportunistic cervical cancer
screening, 17
EPIC model to simulate the macroeconomic effects
of noncommunicable diseases, 187, 187t
Essential Medicines List, 156, 166, 170
Framework Convention on Tobacco Control
(FCTC), 10, 89, 188, 189
Global Health Estimates, 7b
Global Health Observatory, 250
Global Monitoring Framework for
Noncommunicable Diseases, 166
on HBV vaccine, 155
on HCV infection, 151
on health expenditures covered by external sources,
282, 283

on imaging guidelines, 199
on life table estimates for China, 297
mortality databank, 26
MPOWER report on global tobacco epidemic, 36
on national cancer control planning, 195, 243, 267
on noncommunicable disease best buys for LMICs, 8
on palliative care, 165, 168
Study of Global AGEing and Adult Health, 298
Surgical Safety Checklist, 199
Three-Step Analgesic Ladder, 166
WHO Action Plan for the Global Strategy for the
Prevention and Control of Noncommunicable
Diseases, 39
World Trade Organization (WTO), 189
Y
Yerramilli, Pooja, 281
Yip, Cheng-Har, 223
youth smoking, 10, 182, 184, 186
Yurekli, Ayda, 175, 187
Z
Zambia, cervical cancer in, 71, 75
Zatońksi, Witold, 175
Zauber, Ann G., 101
Zelle, S. G., 59, 60, 216
Zhao, Fang-hui, 249
Zimbabwe
cancer trends in, 29
cervical cancer, increases in, 23
zur Hausen, H., 257

Index

341

ECO-AUDIT

Environmental Benefits Statement
The World Bank Group is committed to reducing its environmental footprint.
In support of this commitment, the Publishing and Knowledge Division leverages
electronic publishing options and print-on-demand technology, which is located
in regional hubs worldwide. Together, these initiatives enable print runs to be
lowered and shipping distances decreased, resulting in reduced paper consumption,
chemical use, greenhouse gas emissions, and waste.
The Publishing and Knowledge Division follows the recommended standards
for paper use set by the Green Press Initiative. The majority of our books are
printed on Forest Stewardship Council (FSC)–certified paper, with nearly all
containing 50–100 percent recycled content. The recycled fiber in our book paper
is either unbleached or bleached using totally chlorine free (TCF), processed
chlorine free (PCF), or enhanced elemental chlorine free (EECF) processes.
More information about the Bank’s environmental philosophy can be found
at http://crinfo.worldbank.org/wbcrinfo/node/4.

