8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis
and Staging of Lung Cancer
Brett W. Carter and Jeremy J. Erasmus

Learning Objectives

• Understand the role of imaging in diagnosing and
staging lung cancer.
• Describe the tumor (T), lymph node (N), and metastasis (M) descriptors and stage groups outlined in
the eighth edition of the TNM staging system
(TNM-8).
• Employ TNM-8 to properly characterize and stage
lung cancers with multiple sites of pulmonary
involvement, including those with multiple tumor
nodules, ground-glass lesions, and consolidation.

8.1

Introduction

Lung cancer is a major cause of cancer-related mortality
worldwide and is the leading cause of cancer-related mortality in the United States in both men and women, accounting
for more deaths than colorectal, breast, prostate, and pancreatic cancers combined [1, 2]. Lung cancer is staged using a
typical tumor (T), node (N), and metastasis (M) scheme.
The seventh edition of the tumor-node-metastasis (TNM)
staging system for lung cancer (TNM-7) included key
changes to the T and M descriptors and the recommendation
that both small cell lung carcinoma and bronchopulmonary
carcinoid tumors be staged with this system [3]. Updated
revisions to the TNM staging system, in the form of the
eighth edition (TNM-8), have been accepted by the Union
for International Cancer Control (UICC) and the American
Joint Committee on Cancer (AJCC) based on proposals
from the International Association for the Study of Lung
Cancer [4]. TNM-8 features additional changes to the T and

B. W. Carter (*) · J. J. Erasmus
Department of Diagnostic Radiology, The University of Texas MD
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA
e-mail: bcarter2@mdanderson.org; jerasmus@mdanderson.org

M descriptors, modifications, and additions to the overall
stage groups, new recommendations for the staging of
patients with multiple sites of pulmonary involvement, and
recommendations for lesion measurement. In this manuscript, we discuss the role of imaging in the diagnosis of
lung cancer and the key features of TNM-8 with which radiologists must be familiar.

8.2

Diagnosis of Lung Cancer

8.2.1

Clinical Symptoms

Most patients diagnosed with lung cancer manifest in the
fifth and sixth decades of life [5]. Approximately three-­
fourths of patients demonstrate clinical symptoms at the time
of presentation, the most common of which include cough
(50–75%), hemoptysis (25–50%), dyspnea (25%), and chest
pain (20%). Nonspecific symptoms related to systemic manifestations of the malignancy such as anorexia, weight loss, or
fatigue may be present. Clinical symptoms also depend on
the local effects of the primary tumor, the presence of
regional or distant metastases, and the coexistence of paraneoplastic syndromes. While patients with solitary, peripherally located tumors tend to be asymptomatic, those with
central endobronchial tumors may demonstrate fever, dyspnea, hemoptysis, and cough. Symptoms related to invasion
of the mediastinum and associated vital structures include
chest pain, vocal cord paralysis and hoarseness, facial and
upper truncal edema, headaches, neck vein distention and
enlarged collateral chest wall vessels (as seen in superior
vena cava obstruction), and dysphagia (as seen in esophageal
involvement). Lung cancers may produce symptoms via the
release of bioactive substances or hormones or result in
immune-mediated neural tissue destruction caused by antibody or cell-mediated immune responses. Such paraneoplastic syndromes occur in 10–20% of lung cancer patients, the
most common of which are related to the release of antidiuretic and adrenocorticotropin hormones, which can result in

© The Author(s) 2019
J. Hodler et al. (eds.), Diseases of the Chest, Breast, Heart and Vessels 2019–2022, IDKD Springer Series,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-11149-6_8

79

80

B. W. Carter and J. J. Erasmus

hyponatremia and serum hypo-osmolarity and in Cushing’s
syndrome (central obesity, hypertension, glucose intolerance, plethora, hirsutism), respectively [5].

8.2.2

I maging Evaluation of Pulmonary
Nodules

Once a solitary pulmonary nodule is identified, it may be
further evaluated with cross-sectional imaging techniques
such as computed tomography (CT) and/or positron emission tomography (PET)/CT. Key features that should be
assessed include morphology, density, growth, and metabolic activity.

8.2.2.1 Morphology and Density
Pulmonary nodules may be described as solid or subsolid, the
latter of which includes part-solid (combination of solid and
ground-glass components) and nonsolid (pure ground-­glass)
nodules. Updated guidelines for the evaluation of solid and
subsolid pulmonary nodules have been published by the
Fleischner Society but are beyond the scope of this manuscript. Continuous improvement in CT technology has enabled
the widespread utilization of thin collimation imaging and
improved the detection and characterization of subsolid pulmonary nodules [6]. In general, subsolid nodules that persist
on CT have a higher incidence of malignancy than solid nodules, as 63% of part-solid nodules are malignant as compared
to 18% for ground-glass opacities and 7% for solid nodules
[6]. For subsolid nodules, the likelihood of malignancy varies
according to the size of the soft tissue component on CT. The
frequency of lobulation, spiculation, and pseudocavitation
(small focal lucencies) has also been reported to be significantly higher in malignant part-solid nodules. The “classic”
morphology of a lung cancer has often been described as irregular or “spiculated”; however, it is important to recognize that
benign lesions may occasionally demonstrate this appearance.
Similarly, although many benign pulmonary nodules have a
smooth margin, malignant lesions, including lung cancer, can
have a similar manifestation.
The presence of intralesional fat (defined as Hounsfield
Units of −40 to −120 on CT) almost always represents a
benign hamartoma or, less commonly, lipoid pneumonia.
Pulmonary metastases may contain fat in the setting of a primary soft tissue tumor that contains fat such as a liposarcoma, although this is rare. Different patterns of calcification
may be identified within pulmonary nodules, some of which
are typically benign and others of which tend to be malignant. For instance, central, popcorn, and laminated patterns
of calcification tend to be benign and may be seen in the setting of granulomatous disease or hamartomas. Eccentric and
stippled patterns of calcification are more concerning for
malignant lesions.

8.2.2.2 Growth
The stability of nodules can be assessed by comparison to
any chest radiographs or CT examinations performed in the
past. In general, solid pulmonary nodules that have been
stable for >2 years are considered benign and may represent
granulomas, hamartomas, or intrapulmonary lymph nodes.
The determination of stability for subsolid nodules, including part-solid and nonsolid (pure ground-glass) nodules is
more complex, as such lesions can remain stable for a long
period of time (>2 years) due to slow growth rates.
Lung cancers typically double in volume (defined as an
increase of 26% in diameter) between 30 and 400 days (with
an average of 240 days). Extremely rapid doubling times are
more likely to reflect a benign etiology. For example, volume
doubling times <20–30 days are suggestive of an infectious
or inflammatory etiology but can occur with lymphoma or
rapidly growing metastases. Small lung cancers may demonstrate long volume doubling times. For instance, in a screening study analyzing the growth rates of small lung cancers on
CT, the doubling time ranged from 52 to 1733 days (mean of
452 days), and 20% of these malignancies had a volumetric
doubling time >2 years [7]. These lesions were typically
well-differentiated adenocarcinomas. For subsolid nodules,
an increase in overall size, density, and/or an associated solid
component should raise the suspicion for malignancy [8].
8.2.2.3 Metabolic Activity
PET/CT using the radiopharmaceutical [18F]-fluoro-2-deoxy-­
D-glucose (FDG), a D-glucose analog labeled with fluorine­18, compliments conventional radiologic assessment of lung
nodules. The reported sensitivity and specificity for detecting
malignant pulmonary lesions are 97% and 78%, respectively.
Thus, when solid nodules measuring 1 cm or greater in diameter demonstrate little to no FDG uptake, the likelihood of
malignancy is generally considered to be low. One of the limitations of PET/CT is that the spatial resolution of PET scanners is in the range of 6 mm; therefore, smaller lesions may not
appear FDG-avid even when cancer cells are present. Other
limitations include false-positive studies with benign lesions,
such as infection, inflammation, and granulomatous disease,
and false-negative examinations due to indolent neoplasms
such as bronchopulmonary carcinoid and lesions in the adenocarcinoma spectrum (adenocarcinoma in situ and minimally
invasive adenocarcinoma), small foci of metastasis, and nonenlarged lymph nodes (those measuring <10 mm).

Key Point

• In the evaluation of pulmonary nodules for potential malignancy, the most important features to consider include morphology, density, growth over
time, and metabolic activity on FDG PET/CT.

8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis and Staging of Lung Cancer

8.3

 atient Evaluation and the Role
P
of Imaging

Once a diagnosis of lung cancer has been made, a variety of
imaging techniques are available to further evaluate patients.
For non-small cell lung cancer, the National Comprehensive
Cancer Network (NCCN) recommends that the initial patient
evaluation include (1) pathology review, (2) history and
physical examination, (3) CT of the chest and upper ­abdomen
with intravenous contrast (including coverage of the adrenal
glands), (4) laboratory studies (typically complete blood
count, platelets, and chemistry profile), and (5) smoking cessation counseling [9]. Additional imaging examinations
including FDG PET/CT and magnetic resonance (MR)
imaging may be used depending on the clinical stage and
have specific advantages and disadvantages.

8.3.1

Computed Tomography

CT with intravenous contrast is the imaging modality of
choice for evaluating most patients with lung cancer, as the
modality accurately demonstrates the location and size of the
primary lesion, the extent of local disease, and the relationship of the tumor to intrathoracic structures. Additionally, it
can be used to determine the presence of intrathoracic and
extrathoracic lymph node metastases, which are typically
considered abnormal when they measure >1 cm in short-axis
diameter. However, the strictly anatomic information provided by limits its effectiveness in this regard. For instance,
in one study, 44% of metastatic nodes measured <1 cm, and
77% of patients without lymph node metastases had nodes
measuring >1 cm [10].

8.3.2

FDG PET/CT

FDG PET/CT is more accurate than CT or stand-alone PET
in determining the tumor classification, with integrated PET/
CT correctly predicting the tumor stage in 86% of cases
compared to 68% with CT and 46% with PET [11].
Additionally, FDG PET/CT can distinguish between tumor
and associated post-obstructive atelectasis/pneumonitis,
with the former typically demonstrating greater FDG uptake
[12]. As FDG PET/CT combines the anatomic information
of CT and the functional information of PET, it is more accurate than CT in detecting lymph node metastases. Early studies demonstrated a pooled average sensitivity, specificity,
positive predictive value, negative predictive value, and
accuracy of PET/CT of, respectively, 73%, 91%, 71%, 90%,
and 86%, compared to 74%, 73%, 52%, 88%, and 73% of
CT alone and 83%, 81%, 71%, 89%, and 82% of PET alone
[13]. FDG PET/CT is superior to both CT and PET in

81

identifying distant metastatic disease, particularly soft tissue
and pleural metastases, and is better than nuclear medicine
bone scintigraphy as the imaging modality of choice for
detecting osseous metastases [13].

8.3.3

MR Imaging

MR imaging is typically not routinely performed in the evaluation of patients with lung cancer; however, it has been
shown to be superior to CT and FDG PET/CT for identifying
invasion of the mediastinum and chest wall and evaluating
the heart, pericardium, and vascular structures [14, 15].
Characteristic MR imaging features of chest wall invasion
include (1) infiltration or disruption of the normal extrapleural fat plane on T1-weighted imaging, (2) hyperintensity of
the parietal pleura on T2-weighted imaging, (3) rib destruction on short tau inversion recovery (STIR) sequences, and
(4) fixation of the tumor to the chest wall during breathing on
cine MR imaging. MR imaging is better than CT in differentiating between the primary neoplasm and post-obstructive
atelectasis/pneumonitis, the former of which typically usually shows higher signal on T2-weighted imaging than the
central tumor [14]. MR imaging is the best imaging modality
for identifying brain and liver metastases and can be used to
diagnose adrenal metastases; specifically, chemical shift
techniques can be used to differentiate adrenal metastases
from adenomas, with reported sensitivity and specificity of
100% and 81%, respectively.
Key Point

• Once a diagnosis of lung cancer has been made,
most patients are further assessed with contrast-­
enhanced CT. Additional imaging modalities such
as FDG PET/CT and MR imaging may be obtained
depending on the suspected clinical stage and/or
further evaluation of specific findings.

8.4

Lung Cancer Staging

8.4.1

Rationale and Methodology for TNM-8

A significant limitation of the International Association for
the Study of Lung Cancer (IASLC) Staging Project that
informed TNM-7 was the retrospective nature of the database. An international group led by the IASLC collected new
lung cancer cases with retrospective and prospective clinical
information for the creation of a large database that would
ultimately inform TNM-8 [4, 16]. The database included
data on 94,708 cases diagnosed between 1999 and 2010

82

B. W. Carter and J. J. Erasmus

gathered from 35 sources in 16 countries, 4667 of which
were submitted through an online electronic data capture
system stored at Cancer Research and Biostatistics in Seattle,
Washington. Of these cases, 17,552 were excluded due to
unknown or different histologic type and incomplete stage
information. Thus, 77,156 patients (70,967 with non-small
cell lung cancer and 6189 with small cell lung cancer) with
clinical and pathologic staging information were available
for analysis.

8.4.2

Modifications to TNM-8

8.4.2.1 T Classification
The tumor (T) classification assigns specific descriptors to
characterize the primary lung cancer [17] (Table 8.1). When
evaluating tumors, the key imaging features to consider
include lesion size (typically measured in long-axis diameter), the presence or absence of local invasion, and the presence or absence of tumor nodules. Analysis of the new lung
cancer staging database evaluated the impact of these features on patient survival, and several significant changes are
introduced in TNM-8.

8.4.2.2 Tumor Size
The overall size of the primary lung cancer is one of the most
important considerations in T descriptor determination, and
significant differences in survival between lung cancers of
various sizes have influenced additional changes introduced in
TNM-8. Analysis of the new lung cancer staging database
revealed separation of T1 lesions from T2 lesions based on a
size threshold of 3 cm and progressively worse survival for
each cut point of 1 cm. Thus, T1 lung cancers are divided into
three groups at 1 cm thresholds: T1a tumors measuring 1 cm
or less, T1b nodules measuring greater than 1 cm and less than
or equal to 2 cm, and T1c lesions measuring greater than 2 cm
and less than or equal to 3 cm. Similarly, T2 lung cancers are
divided into two groups: T2a lesions measuring greater than
3 cm and less than or equal to 4 cm and T2b tumors measuring
greater than 4 cm and less than or equal to 5 cm. Finally, T3
lesions measure greater than 5 cm and less than or equal to
7 cm, and T4 tumors measure greater than 7 cm in TNM-8.
8.4.2.3 Involvement of Main Bronchi
A lung cancer invading a main bronchus 2 cm or more from
the carina was classified as T2, whereas involvement of the
more proximal aspect of a main bronchus was classified as a

Table 8.1 TNM Descriptors for TNM-8
T descriptor
TX
T0
Tis
T1
T1a
T1b
T1c
T2
T2a
T2b
T3
T4
N descriptor
NX
N0
N1
N2
N3
M descriptor
M0
M1
M1a
M1b
M1c

Definition
Tumor cannot be assessed or tumor proven by the presence of malignant cells in sputum or bronchial washings but not
visualized by imaging or bronchoscopy
No evidence of the primary tumor
Carcinoma in situ
Tumor ≤3 cm in greatest dimension, surrounded by lung or visceral pleura, without bronchoscopic evidence of invasion more
proximal than the lobar bronchus
Tumor ≤1 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor >1 cm but ≤2 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor >2 cm but ≤3 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor >3 cm but ≤5 cm or tumor with any of the following features: Involvement of a main bronchus regardless of distance
from carina, invasion of the visceral pleura, associated with partial or complete lung atelectasis/pneumonitis
Tumor >3 cm but ≤4 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor >4 cm but ≤5 cm in greatest dimension
Tumor >5 cm or one that directly invades any of the following structures: Parietal pleura, chest wall (including superior sulcus
tumors), phrenic nerve, parietal pericardium, or separate tumor nodule(s) in the same lobe
Tumor measuring >7 cm that invades any of the following structures: Mediastinum, diaphragm, heart, great vessels, trachea,
recurrent laryngeal nerve, esophagus, vertebral body, carina, or separate tumor nodule(s) in a different lobe of the same lung
Definition
Lymph nodes cannot be assessed
No regional lymph nodes
Ipsilateral peribronchial and/or ipsilateral hilar lymph nodes and intrapulmonary nodes, including involvement by direct
extension
Ipsilateral mediastinal and/or subcarinal lymph node(s)
Contralateral mediastinal, contralateral hilar, ipsilateral or contralateral scalene, or supraclavicular lymph node(s)
Definition
No metastasis
Metastasis
Separate tumor nodule(s) in contralateral lung; malignant pleural effusion or pleural thickening/nodules/masses; malignant
pericardial effusion or pericardial thickening/nodules/masses
Single distant (extrathoracic) metastasis in single organ
Multiple distant (extrathoracic) metastases in single or multiple organs

Adapted from [25]

8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis and Staging of Lung Cancer

T3 lesion in TNM-7. Analysis of the new lung cancer staging
database revealed that lung cancers invading a main bronchus less than 2 cm from the carina, but without direct invasion of the carina, were associated with better survival
compared to lung cancers with other characteristic T3 features. Thus, in TNM-8, lung cancers involving a main bronchus, regardless of the distance from the carina, are grouped
together as T2 tumors.

8.4.2.4 Atelectasis or Pneumonitis of the Lung
A lung cancer resulting in partial atelectasis or pneumonitis,
defined as involving less than an entire lung, was classified
as T2 in TNM-7, whereas atelectasis or pneumonitis of an
entire lung was classified as a T3 lesion. Analysis of the new
lung cancer staging database revealed that patients with
complete atelectasis or pneumonitis of a lung had better survival than those with other characteristics T3 features. Thus,
partial and complete forms of lung atelectasis and pneumonitis are grouped together as T2 lesions in TNM-8 (Fig. 8.1).

83

8.4.2.6 Involvement of the Mediastinal Pleura
In TNM-7, involvement of the mediastinal pleura was classified as T3. Analysis of the new database showed that lung
cancers with this feature were associated with a better
prognosis than other T3 lesions; however, only a small
number of cases were available. It was also noted that
mediastinal pleura invasion was rarely used in clinical
staging reports as it can be difficult to accurately determine. Therefore, invasion of the mediastinal pleura has
been eliminated from the T classification in TNM-8.

Key Point

• The most important features to consider in the classification of tumors include lesion size, location,
and local extension. Modifications to the T classification have been made on the basis of 1 cm increments in tumor size; grouping of lung cancers that
result in partial or complete lung atelectasis or
pneumonitis; grouping of tumors with involvement
of a main bronchus irrespective of distance from the
carina; reassignment of diaphragmatic invasion in
terms of T classification; and elimination of mediastinal pleural invasion.

8.4.2.5 Diaphragmatic Invasion
In TNM-7, invasion of the diaphragm was included in T3.
Analysis of the new database demonstrated that the 5-year
survival of patients with this feature was worse than that of
patients with other T3 lung cancers but similar to that of
patients with T4 tumors. Therefore, diaphragmatic invasion
has been reclassified as T4 in TNM-8 (Fig. 8.2).

a

Fig. 8.1 Atelectasis/pneumonitis. (a) Contrast-enhanced axial CT of a
63-year-old man with non-small cell lung cancer demonstrates occlusion of the right upper lobe bronchus (arrow) and complete atelectasis
of the right upper lobe (*) due to a right perihilar mass. (b) Contrast-­
enhanced axial CT of a 55-year-old man with non-small cell lung can-

b

cer demonstrates complete occlusion of the right main bronchus (arrow)
and complete atelectasis of the right lung (*) due to a large right perihilar mass. In TNM-8, partial and complete lung atelectasis/pneumonitis
are grouped together as a T2 descriptor

84

a

B. W. Carter and J. J. Erasmus

b

Fig. 8.2 Diaphragmatic invasion. (a) Axial contrast-enhanced axial
CT of a 61-year-old man with non-small cell lung cancer shows a mass
(*) in the right lower lobe inseparable from the right hemidiaphragm
(arrow). (b) Axial cine T2-weighted MR confirmed invasion of the right

hemidiaphragm. Because the 5-year survival of patients with diaphragmatic invasion is similar to that of patients with other T4 tumors, diaphragmatic invasion has been reclassified from T3 to T4 in TNM-8

8.4.2.7 Lymph Node (N) Classification
The lymph node (N) classification assigns specific descriptors that are related to the presence or absence of intrathoracic lymph node disease (Table 8.1). In contrast to primary
lung cancers, for which the long-axis diameter is measured
and reported, lymph nodes are typically measured in short-­
axis diameter. IASLC recommends use of a standardized
lymph node map that assigns nodes into specific supraclavicular, upper, aorticopulmonary, subcarinal, lower, hilar/
interlobar, and peripheral zones [18]. The analysis of the new
database revealed that the current N classification provides
consistent separation of prognostically distinct groups. Thus,
the lymph node descriptors are unchanged for TNM-8 [19].
N0 is defined as the absence of lymph node disease. N1 is
characterized by ipsilateral peripheral or hilar lymph nodes,
N2 includes ipsilateral mediastinal including subcarinal
lymph nodes, and N3 involves ipsilateral or contralateral
supraclavicular lymph node or contralateral mediastinal,
hilar/interlobar, or intrapulmonary lymph nodes.
The potential prognostic impact of the number of lymph
node stations involved and skip metastases was also evaluated.
To assess the former, pathologic staging (pN) was divided into
several groups, in which the letter “a” denoted single lymph
node station involvement and the letter “b” represented multiple lymph node station involvement within an N category.

Therefore, single (pN1a) and multiple (pN1b) pN1 stations and
single (pN2a) and multiple (pN2b) pN2 stations were delineated. No significant difference was seen between the pN1b
and pN2a groups, although survival differences between the
pN1a and pN1b groups and between the pN2a and pN2b
groups were significant. To assess the skip metastases, pN2a
was divided into several components, in which a designation
ending in “1” indicated the presence of skip metastases and a
designation ending in “2” indicated the absence of skip metastases. Thus, single pN2 with skip (no pN1 involvement, pN2a1)
and single pN2 without skip (pN1 and pN2 involvement,
pN2a2) categories were recognized. Although the survival of
patients with pN2a1 was better than those with pN1b, this difference was not significant. Although significant differences in
survival were present between the pN2a1 and pN2a2 groups
and between the pN2a2 and pN2b groups, no significant difference was present between the pN1b and pN2a1 groups.
For the purposes of clinical staging, IASLC recommends
that radiologists document the number of lymph node stations involved and classify the N category using descriptors
such as N1a (single lymph node station), N1b (multiple
lymph node stations), N2a (single lymph node station), and
N2b (multiple lymph node stations). The presence or absence
of skip metastasis (pN2a1 or pN2a2) should be noted when
such information is available.

8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis and Staging of Lung Cancer

Key Point

• The current nomenclature for lymph node classification is maintained in TNM-8 due to consistent separation of prognostically distinct groups, which is
primarily based on lymph node location. In general,
ipsilateral hilar (N1) lymph nodes are considered
resectable, ipsilateral mediastinal or subcarinal
lymph nodes (N2) may be resectable (usually after
induction chemotherapy), and contralateral mediastinal lymph nodes and scalene or supraclavicular adenopathy (N3) are generally considered unresectable.

8.4.2.8 Metastasis (M) Classification
The metastasis (M) classification assigns specific descriptors
reflecting the absence (M0) or presence (M1) of intrathoracic
or extrathoracic metastatic disease (Table 8.1). The M classification for TNM-7 included M1a and M1b components for
intrathoracic and extrathoracic metastatic disease, respectively. Analysis of the new lung cancer staging database
revealed that patients with a single metastasis in one extrathoracic organ (median survival of 11.4 months) had similar
survival to that of patients with M1a (median survival of
11.5 months) but better survival compared to patients with
multiple metastases in one or more extrathoracic organs
(median survival of 6.3 months) [20]. Therefore, M1 is
a

Fig. 8.3 Intrathoracic metastases. (a) Contrast-enhanced axial CT of a
66-year-old man with non-small cell lung cancer demonstrates extensive pleural thickening and nodularity (*) in the right hemithorax compatible with metastatic disease. (b) Contrast-enhanced axial CT of a
57-year-old woman with non-small cell lung cancer shows several nod-

85

divided into M1a, M1b, and M1c components based on survival differences. M1a, or intrathoracic metastatic disease,
describes pleural or pericardial spread of disease and tumor
nodules in the contralateral lung (Fig. 8.3). M1b and M1c
describe extrathoracic metastatic disease, the former of
which includes a single metastasis involving a single distant
(extrathoracic) organ and the latter of which includes multiple metastases in one or more distant (extrathoracic) organs
(Fig. 8.4). Overall, the most common sites of metastatic disease include the brain, liver, adrenal glands, and bone.
It is recommended that radiologists document the following features on imaging studies performed for the purposes
of clinical staging: (1) the number and location of metastatic
lesions, (2) the diameter of individual metastases, and (3) the
number and location of organs affected.

Key Point

• The M1 descriptor is subdivided into M1a (intrathoracic metastatic disease, including pleural or
pericardial spread, cardiac metastasis, and contralateral tumor nodule), M1b (extrathoracic metastatic disease, with one lesion in one distant organ),
and M1c (extrathoracic metastatic disease, with
more than one lesion in one or more distant organs)
based on the location and number of metastases.

b

ules (arrows) involving the pericardium and a small amount of pericardial fluid, compatible with metastatic disease. M1a is used to describe
pleural or pericardial spread of disease and tumor nodules in the contralateral lung

86

B. W. Carter and J. J. Erasmus

a

b

c

Fig. 8.4 Distant (extrathoracic) metastases. (a) Axial contrast-­ liver (arrows), consistent with metastases. C. Fused axial FDG PET/CT
enhanced T1-weighted MR image of a 53-year-old man with non-small of a 71-year-old man with non-small cell lung cancer demonstrates
cell lung cancer demonstrates an enhancing metastasis (arrow) with hepatic (white arrow) and left adrenal (black arrow) metastases. TNM-8
surrounding edema in the left middle frontal gyrus. (b) Contrast-­ recognizes differences in survival based on both the location and numenhanced axial CT of a 64-year-old man with non-small cell lung can- ber of metastases; thus, distant metastatic disease is designated as M1b
cer demonstrates numerous heterogeneously hypodense masses in the (solitary metastasis in a single distant organ) and M1c (multiple metastases in one or more distant organs)

8.4.3

Stage Groups

Due to changes to the T and M descriptors in TNM-8, the
stage groups in TNM-7 have been modified, and new
groups have been added [21] (Table 8.2). For example, in

response to the separation of T1 lesions into T1a, T1b, and
T1c components based on 1 cm increments, three new
associated stages have been created and designated as IA1,
IA2, and IA3, respectively. In another instance, to describe
cases of locally advanced tumors (including T3 and T4

8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis and Staging of Lung Cancer

Table 8.2 Stage Groups for TNM-8
Stage
Occult carcinoma
Stage 0
Stage IA1
Stage IA2
Stage IA3
Stage IB
Stage IIA
Stage IIB

Stage IIIA

Stage IIIB

Stage IIIC
Stage IVA
Stage IVB

Tumor
TX
Tis
T1a (mi)
T1a
T1b
T1c
T2a
T2b
T1a-c
T2a
T2b
T1a-c
T2a-b
T3
T4
T4
T1a-c
T2a-b
T3
T4
T3
T4
Any T
Any T
Any T

Node
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N0
N1
N1
N1
N2
N2
N1
N0
N1
N3
N3
N2
N2
N3
N3
Any N
Any N
Any N

Metastasis
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M0
M1a
M1b
M1c

mi minimally invasive
Adapted from [25]

lesions) with N3 but no evidence of metastatic disease, a
new stage designated as stage IIIC has been created for
TNM-8. Intrathoracic metastatic disease, including pleural, pericardial, and cardiac spread, as well as tumor nodules in the contralateral lung, remains classified as stage
IVA. A single metastasis to a single distant organ (M1b) is
considered stage IVA, whereas multiple distant metastases in one or more distant organs (M1c) are classified as
stage IVB.

8.4.4

 ung Cancers with Multiple Sites
L
of Pulmonary Involvement

Multiple distinct patterns of lung cancer manifesting with
several sites of pulmonary involvement have been described,
including multiple primary lung cancers, lung cancers with
one or more tumor nodules, multiple ground-glass lesions,
and consolidation [22]. Recommendations for the staging of
tumors resulting in these patterns is included for the first
time in TNM-8 and are based on review of the literature and
expert opinion provided by IASLC.

8.4.4.1 Multiple Primary Lung Cancers
When a lung cancer is identified on an imaging examination
and there are multiple additional lung lesions, the radiologist
must consider data from several sources when attempting to

87

determine whether such lesions represent multiple primary
lung cancers. IASLC recommends that the decision to classify two (or more) lung lesions as synchronous primary lung
cancers or two foci of a single lung cancer should be based
on multidisciplinary evaluation that incorporates clinical,
relevant findings on prior and current imaging and histopathologic findings obtained at image-guided or surgical biopsy
or surgical resection [22, 23]. If two (or more) lung lesions
are determined to represent separate primary lung cancers,
then each separate malignancy should be staged using
TNM-8.

8.4.4.2 Lung Cancer with One or More Tumor
Nodules
When a lung cancer is identified on an imaging examination
with one or more nodules, these other lesions may or may
not be of the same histologic subtype as the primary lesion.
Tumor nodules related to the primary malignancy should be
suspected when one or more solid lung nodule is identified
along with a dominant lung lesion resulting in the “classic”
lung cancer appearance, such as a spiculated nodule or mass.
Analysis of the new lung cancer staging database revealed a
progressive decrease in survival with increasing distance
between a primary lung cancer and associated tumor nodule.
Thus, patient survival is better when lung cancers have tumor
nodules in the same lobe as the primary tumor (T3) compared with those lesions with nodules in a different ipsilateral lobe (T4) or the contralateral lung (M1a) [22, 24]
(Fig. 8.5).
8.4.4.3 Multiple Ground-glass Lesions
In general, lung cancers appearing as multiple lesions with
ground-glass or lepidic features are almost always adenocarcinoma, tend to affect women and nonsmokers, and are
associated with excellent patient outcomes and infrequent
recurrences [22, 25]. Compared to other types of lung cancer, subsolid adenocarcinomas tend to have a lower likelihood of resulting in lymph node spread or metastasis, have
a greater propensity for developing additional subsolid
lung cancers, and are more likely to behave in an indolent
manner [25].
IASLC recommends that the term multifocal adenocarcinoma be used to describe lung lesions if a malignant subsolid
nodule is present (suspected at clinical staging or histopathologically proven) and if other ground-glass lesions are present [25]. This definition also includes cases in which a
subsolid lesion with a 50% or greater solid (invasive) component appears to have arisen from a ground-glass nodule and
other ground-glass opacities are present. The term multifocal
lung adenocarcinoma should not be applied to patients with
multiple ground-glass nodules likely representing benign
lesions or preneoplastic/preinvasive lesions such as atypical
adenomatous hyperplasia.

88

a

B. W. Carter and J. J. Erasmus

b

c

Fig. 8.5 Lung cancers with separate tumor nodules. (a) Contrast-­
enhanced axial CT of a 39-year-old woman with non-small cell lung
cancer demonstrates the tumor in the right upper lobe (*) and a separate
tumor nodule (arrow) in the adjacent lung. These findings are designated as T3. (b) Contrast-enhanced coronal CT of a 72-year-old woman
with non-small cell lung cancer demonstrates the tumor in the right

upper lobe (*) and a separate tumor nodule in the middle lobe (arrow).
These findings are classified as T4. (c) Contrast-enhanced axial CT of a
63-year-old man with non-small cell lung cancer demonstrates the
tumor in the left lung (*) and a separate tumor nodule in the right upper
lobe (arrow). Biopsy of the right upper lobe nodule confirmed malignancy, and these findings are designated as M1a

For the purposes of staging, IASLC recommends that the
T classification be determined by the lesion with the highest-­
level T descriptor and the number of lesions (#)—or simply
“(m)” for multiple—indicated in parentheses (Fig. 8.6).
Lesion size is determined by the largest diameter of the solid
component measured on CT or the largest diameter of the
invasive
component
at
pathologic
examination.
Adenocarcinoma in situ and minimally invasive adenocarcinoma should be classified as Tis and T1a(mi), respectively
[26]. It is recommended that the T(#/m) multifocal classification should be used regardless of whether these lesions are

suspected on the basis of imaging or if there is histopathologic proof and regardless of whether the lesions are in the
same lobe or in different lobes of the same or different lung.
Once the T classification has been determined, the N and M
descriptors apply to all of the tumor foci collectively.

8.4.4.4 Consolidation
The dominant manifestation of some lung cancers may
appear as diffuse consolidation or a “pneumonic type” of
adenocarcinoma, most of which are invasive mucinous
adenocarcinomas [27–29]. These lesions manifest as a

8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis and Staging of Lung Cancer

Fig. 8.6 Multiple ground-­
glass lesions (multifocal
adenocarcinoma). (a)
Unenhanced axial CT of a
58-year-old woman with
multifocal lung
adenocarcinoma demonstrates
several ground-glass nodules
in the right lung, the largest of
which measures 1.6 cm. (b)
Unenhanced axial CT of a
64-year-old woman with
multifocal lung
adenocarcinoma shows
numerous ground-glass
nodules bilaterally, the largest
of which measures 4.5 cm. In
the setting of multiple
ground-glass lesions, the
IASLC recommends the
utilization of the dominant
lesion for T descriptor
purposes. In the first case, the
nodule is classified as a T1b
lesion, and the overall
descriptor can be listed as
either T1b (# of lesions) or
T1b (m). In the second case,
the nodule is classified as a
T2b lesion, and the overall
descriptor can be listed as
either T2b (# of lesions) or
T2b (m)

89

a

b

consolidative pattern on CT without evidence of an obstructed
bronchus and may only involve a specific region (such as a
segment or lobe), multiple regions (appearing confluent or
separate), or the lung in a diffuse manner. Lymph node
involvement and metastatic disease are uncommon at presentation, even in the setting of extensive lung disease [30–
32]. Progression is typically slow; however, the overall
survival is worse compared with that of patients with multifocal ground-glass lesions.
For the purposes of staging, IASLC recommends that,
when the lung cancer involves a single area, the T classification is determined by the size of the lesion. When multiple
sites of involvement are present, the disease is characterized
as T3 if confined to one lobe, T4 if different lobes of the
same lung are affected, and M1a if both lungs are involved

(Fig. 8.7). When disease is present within both lungs, the T
classification is based on the appropriate T category for the
lung with the greatest extent of tumor involvement. For a
lesion that is confined to a single lobe but is difficult to measure reliably, the T3 descriptor should be used. Lesions in
which there is extension of tumor into an adjacent lobe or a
discrete separate area of involvement of an adjacent lobe is
identified should be classified as T4. Once the T classification has been determined, the N and M descriptors apply to
all of the tumor foci collectively. This algorithm should also
be used to stage lung cancers presenting with a miliary pattern of disease, characterized by numerous small pulmonary
nodules in the lungs. Miliary disease is often difficult to measure, and a single lobe should be classified as T3 without
regard to size.

90

B. W. Carter and J. J. Erasmus

a

b

c

Fig. 8.7 Lung cancer manifesting as consolidation. (a) Unenhanced
axial CT of a 69-year-old woman with non-small cell lung cancer demonstrates consolidation isolated to the right lower lobe (*) with surrounding ground-glass opacity. As this lesion is limited to the right
lower lobe, it is designated as T3. (b) Contrast-enhanced axial CT of a
49-year-old woman with multifocal adenocarcinoma demonstrates

Key Point

• A subcommittee of the IASLC staging and prognostic factors committee identified four distinct patterns of disease in cases of lung cancer characterized
by multiple sites of pulmonary involvement, including multiple primary lung cancers, lung cancers
with separate tumor nodules, multiple ground-glass
lesions, and consolidation. Specific criteria have
been outlined in order to categorize and stage
lesions with these patterns of disease.

multifocal consolidation (*) in the left upper lobe and extensive ground-­
glass opacities in the left lung. As these lesions are present in both lobes
of the left lung, the designation is T4. (c) Contrast-enhanced axial CT
of a 53-year-old woman with multifocal adenocarcinoma shows consolidation and extensive ground-glass opacities in the lungs bilaterally.
As consolidation is present in both lungs, the designation is M1a

8.4.5

Tumor Measurement

For the purposes of initial clinical staging on cross-sectional
imaging, lung cancers should be measured and reported in
centimeters with millimeter increments. Solid and nonsolid
lesions should be measured on the image showing the greatest tumor dimension, regardless of plane (axial, sagittal, or
coronal), whereas part-solid lesions should be measured on
the image showing the largest average tumor diameter and
the greatest diameter of the solid component of the lesion.
For the purpose of determining the T classification, the

8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis and Staging of Lung Cancer

a

91

b

Fig. 8.8 Measurement of part-solid tumors. (a) and (b) Contrast-­
enhanced axial CT of a 57-year-old woman demonstrates a part-solid
nodule in the left upper lobe with measurement of the entire lesion (A)
and just the solid component (B). For the purpose of evaluating part-­

solid lesions, IASLC recommends that the image showing the largest
average tumor diameter and the greatest diameter of the solid component of the lesion be used. For determining the T descriptor, the longest
diameter of the solid component should be used for part-solid lesions

longest diameter should be used for solid and nonsolid
lesions, and the longest diameter of the solid component
should be used for part-solid lesions [17, 26] (Fig. 8.8).
Regarding optimal CT scan technique, thin-section
images (specifically, 1 mm sections if possible for small
lesions measuring 10 mm or less) help reduce the variability
in measurement and allow visualization of specific tumor
features such as density, shape, and margin due to enhanced
spatial resolution [33–36]. It is recommended that lung or
intermediate window settings should be used to detect and
measure the solid components of subsolid lesions and that
the long-axis measurement of the largest solid component
should be identified.

and extensive-stage SCLC, which includes all other cases.
The TNM staging system has been shown to better differentiate stage-specific survival compared with the Veterans
Administration Lung Study Group system [37, 38].
Analysis of the new database confirmed the prognostic
value of TNM staging in patients with SCLC, and the
IASLC recommends its use for staging of patients with
SCLC. Radiologists should record the following information regarding SCLC: (a) the number of extrathoracic metastatic sites, (b) the number of organs involved, (c) the
diameter of individual metastatic sites, (d) the types of
examinations and studies used for staging, and (e) whether
patients with brain metastases are symptomatic or asymptomatic [39].

8.4.6

Small Cell Lung Cancer

IASLC first recommended that SCLC should be evaluated
with the TNM staging system at the release of TNM-7. A
separate staging system developed by the Veterans
Administration Lung Study Group that divides SCLC into
two subgroups, limited-stage SCLC and extensive-stage
SCLC, based on the extent of disease and the ability to treat
in a single radiation portal, is still often used in current
clinical practice. Limited-stage SCLC is confined to one
hemithorax and can be treated in a single radiation portal,

8.5

Concluding Remarks

The revised TNM staging system, TNM-8, includes important modifications to the T and M classifications, changes
and additions to stage groups, and the introduction of new
recommendations regarding the staging of lung cancers with
multiple pulmonary sites of involvement and guidelines for
tumor measurement. Understanding TNM-8 will allow radiologists to accurately stage patients with lung cancer and
optimize patient management.

92

B. W. Carter and J. J. Erasmus

Take-Home Messages

• Lung cancer is a major cause of cancer mortality,
and accurate staging is crucial to the formulation of
effective treatment strategies.
• Revisions to the eighth edition of the tumor-node-­
metastasis (TNM) staging system are based on significant differences in patient survival.
• TNM-8 features changes to the T and M descriptors,
modifications and additions to the overall stage
groups, new recommendations for the staging of
patients with multiple sites of pulmonary involvement, and recommendations for lesion measurement.

References
1. Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. National Center for
Health Statistics. CDC WONDER On-line Database, compiled
from Compressed Mortality File 1999-2012 Series 20 No. 2R,
2014.
2. American Cancer Society. Cancer facts and figures, 2017. Accessed
30 Jan 2017.
3. Goldstraw P, Crowley J, Chansky K, et al. The IASLC lung cancer
staging project: proposals for the revision of the TNM stage groupings in the forthcoming (seventh) edition of the TNM classification
of malignant Tumours. J Thorac Oncol. 2007;2:706–14.
4. Carter BW, Lichtenberger JP 3rd, Benveniste MK, de Groot PM,
Wu CC, Erasmus JJ, Truong MT. Revisions to the TNM staging
of lung cancer: rationale, significance, and clinical application.
Radiographics 2018;38(2):374-391.
5. Ost DE, Yeung SC, Tanoue LT, Gould MK. Clinical and organizational factors in the initial evaluation of patients with lung cancer: diagnosis and management of lung cancer, 3rd ed: American
College of Chest Physicians evidence-based clinical practice guidelines. Chest. 2013;143(5 Suppl):e121S–41S.
6. Henschke CI, Yankelevitz DF, Mirtcheva R, et al. CT screening for
lung cancer: frequency and significance of part-solid and nonsolid
nodules. AJR. Am J Roentgenol. 2002;178(5):1053–7.
7. Hasegawa M, Sone S, Takashima S, et al. Growth rate of small
lung cancers detected on mass CT screening. Br J Radiol.
2000;73(876):1252–9.
8. Kakinuma R, Ohmatsu H, Kaneko M, et al. Progression of focal
pure ground-glass opacity detected by low-dose helical computed
tomography screening for lung cancer. J Comput Assist Tomogr.
2004;28(1):17–23.
9. National Comprehensive Cancer Network. NCCN Clinical Practice
Guidelines in Oncology (NCCN Guidelines®). Non-Small Cell
Lung Cancer, 2018. Accessed 12 Sept 2018.
10. Prenzel KL, Mönig SP, Sinning JM, et al. Lymph node size
and metastatic infiltration in non-small cell lung cancer. Chest.
2003;123(2):463–7.
11. Pauls S, Buck AK, Hohl K, et al. Improved non-invasive T-staging
in non-small cell lung cancer by integrated 18F-FDG PET/
CT. Nuklearmedizin. 2007;46(1):9–14.. quiz N1-2
12. Steinert HC. PET and PET-CT of lung cancer. Methods Mol Biol.
2011;727:33–51.
13. Chao F, Zhang H. PET/CT in the staging of the non-small-cell lung
cancer. J Biomed Biotechnol. 2012;2012:783739.
14. Ohno Y, Koyama H, Dinkel J, Hintze C. Lung cancer. In: Kauczor
HU, editor. MRI of the lung. Heidelberg, Springer; 2009: 179–216.

15. Ohno Y, Adachi S, Motoyama A, et al. Multiphase ECG triggered
3D contrast-enhanced MR angiography: utility for evaluation of
hilar and mediastinal invasion of bronchogenic carcinoma. J Magn
Reson Imaging. 2001;13:215–24.
16. Rami-Porta R, Bolejack V, Giroux DJ, et al. The IASLC lung
cancer staging project: the new database to inform the eighth edition of the TNM classification of lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol.
2014;9(11):1618–24.
17. Rami-Porta R, Bolejack V, Crowley J, et al. The IASLC lung cancer
staging project: proposals for the revisions of the T descriptors in
the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification for lung
cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10:990–1003.
18. Rusch VW, Asamura H, Watanabe H, et al. The IASLC lung cancer
staging project: a proposal for a new international lymph node map
in the forthcoming seventh edition of the TNM classification for
lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2009;4(5):568–77.
19. Asamura H, Chansky K, Crowley J, et al. The International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer lung cancer staging project: proposals for the revision of the N descriptors in the forthcoming 8th edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J Thorac
Oncol. 2015;10(12):1675–84.
20. Eberhardt WEE, Mitchell A, Crowley J, et al. The IASLC lung cancer staging project: proposals for the revision of the M descriptors
in the forthcoming (8th) edition of the TNM classification of lung
cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2015;10:1515–122.
21. Goldstraw P, Chansky K, Crowley J, et al. The IASLC lung cancer
staging project: proposals for revision of the TNM stage groupings
in the forthcoming (eighth) edition of the TNM classification for
lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(1):39–51.
22. Detterbeck FC, Nicholson AG, Franklin WA, et al. The IASLC
lung cancer staging project: summary of proposals for revisions of
the classification of lung cancers with multiple pulmonary sites of
involvement in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(5):639–50.
23. Detterbeck FC, Franklin WA, Nicholson AG, et al. The IASLC
lung cancer staging project: background data and proposed criteria to distinguish separate primary lung cancers from metastatic
foci in patients with two lung tumors in the forthcoming eighth
edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol.
2016;11(5):651–65.
24. Detterbeck FC, Bolejack V, Arenberg DA, et al. The IASLC lung
cancer staging project: background data and proposals for the classification of lung cancer with separate tumor nodules in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J
Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(5):681–92.
25. Detterbeck FC, Marom EM, Arenberg DA, et al. The IASLC lung
cancer staging project: background data and proposals for the application of TNM staging rules to lung cancer presenting as multiple
nodules with ground glass or Lepidic features or a pneumonic type
of involvement in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification. J Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(5):666–80.
26. Travis WD, Asamura H, Bankier AA, et al. The IASLC lung cancer
staging project: proposals for coding T categories for subsolid nodules and assessment of tumor size in part-solid tumors in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification of lung cancer. J
Thorac Oncol. 2016;11(8):1204–23.
27. Wislez M, Massiani M-A, Milleron B, et al. Clinical characteristics of pneumonic-type adenocarcinoma of the lung. Chest.
2003;123:1868–77.
28. Akira M, Atagi S, Kawahara M, Iuchi K, Johkoh T. High resolution
CT findings of diffuse bronchioloalveolar carcinoma in 38 patients.
Am J Roentgenol. 1999;173:1623–9.
29. Battafarano RJ, Meyers BF, Guthrie TJ, Cooper JD, Patterson
GA. Surgical resection of multifocal non-small cell lung cancer is associated with prolonged survival. Ann Thorac Surg.
2002;74:988–94.

8

Current Concepts in the Diagnosis and Staging of Lung Cancer

30. Barlesi F, Doddoli C, Gimenez C, et al. Bronchioloalveolar carcinoma: myths and realities in the surgical management. Eur J
Cardiothorac Surg. 2003;24:159–64.
31. de Perrot M, Chernenko S, Waddell TK, et al. Role of lung transplantation in the treatment of bronchogenic carcinomas for patients
with end-stage pulmonary disease. J Clin Oncol. 2004;22:4351–6.
32. Ahmad U, Wang Z, Bryant AS, et al. Outcomes for lung transplantation for lung cancer in the united network for organ sharing registry. Ann Thorac Surg. 2012;94:935–41.
33. Petrou M, Quint LE, Nan B, Baker LH. Pulmonary nodule volumetric measurement variability as a function of CT slice thickness and
nodule morphology. AJR Am J Roentgenol. 2007;188:306–12.
34. Goo JM, Tongdee T, Tongdee R, Yeo K, Hildebolt CF, Bae
KT. Volumetric measurement of synthetic lung nodules with multi-­
detector row CT: effect of various image reconstruction parameters
and segmentation thresholds on measurement accuracy. Radiology.
2005;235:850–6.
35. Ravenel JG, Leue WM, Nietert PJ, Miller JV, Taylor KK, Silvestri
GA. Pulmonary nodule volume: effects of reconstruction param-

93
eters on automated measurements—a phantom study. Radiology.
2008;247:400–8.
36. Wang Y, de Bock GH, van Klaveren RJ, et al. Volumetric measurement of pulmonary nodules at low-dose chest CT: effect of
reconstruction setting on measurement variability. Eur Radiol.
2010;20:1180–7.
37. Ignatius Ou SH, Zell JA. The applicability of the proposed IASLC
staging revisions to small cell lung cancer (SCLC) with comparison to the current UICC 6th TNM edition. J Thorac Oncol.
2009;4(3):300–10.
38. Kalemkerian GP, Akerley W, Bogner P, et al. Small cell lung cancer.
J Natl Compr Cancer Netw. 2013;11(1):78–98.
39. Nicholson AG, Chansky K, Crowley J, et al. The International
Association for the Study of Lung Cancer lung cancer staging
project: proposals for the revision of the clinical and pathologic
staging of small cell lung cancer in the forthcoming eighth edition of the TNM classification for lung cancer. J Thorac Oncol.
2016;11(3):300–11.

Open Access This chapter is licensed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License (http://creativecommons.
org/licenses/by/4.0/), which permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons license and indicate if changes were made.
The images or other third party material in this chapter are included in the chapter's Creative Commons license, unless indicated otherwise in
a credit line to the material. If material is not included in the chapter's Creative Commons license and your intended use is not permitted by statutory regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.

